WALLACE: Good evening. From the Health Education Campus of Case Western Reserve University and the Cleveland Clinic I'm Chris Wallace of Fox News and I welcome you to the first of the 2020 presidential debates between President Donald J. Trump and former Vice President Joe Biden.

WALLACE: This debate is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The commission has designed the format, six roughly 15-minute segments with two-minute answers from each candidate to the first question, then open discussion for the rest of each segment. Both campaigns have agreed to these rules.

For the record, I decided the topics and the questions in each topic. I can assure you none of the questions has been shared with the commission or the two candidates. This debate is being conducted under health and safety protocols designed by the Cleveland Clinic, which is serving as the health security adviser to the commission for all four debates. As a precaution, both campaigns have agreed the candidates will not shake hands at the beginning of tonight's debate.


WALLACE: The audience here in the hall has promised to remain silent. No cheers, no boos, or other interruptions so we, and more importantly you, can focus on what the candidates have to say. No noise, except right now as we welcome the Republican nominee, President Trump, and the Democratic nominee, Vice President Biden.

(APPLAUSE)

BIDEN: How are you doing, man?

TRUMP: How are you doing (ph)?

BIDEN: I'm well.

WALLACE: Gentlemen, a lot of people have been waiting for this night. So let's get going. Our first subject is the Supreme Court.

President Trump, you nominated Amy Coney Barrett over the weekend to succeed the late Ruth Bader Ginsburg on the court.

You say the Constitution is clear about your obligation and the Senate's to consider a nominee to the court. Vice President Biden, you say that this is an effort by the president and Republicans to jam through an appointment and what you call an abuse of power.

My first question to both of you tonight, why are you right and make the argument you make, and your opponent wrong? And where do you think a Justice Barrett would take the court?

President Trump, on the first segment you go first. Two minutes.

TRUMP: Thank you very much, Chris. I will tell you very simply we won the election. Elections have consequences. We have the Senate, we have the White House and we have a phenomenal nominee respected by all; top, top academic. Good in every way. Good in every way.

In fact, some of her biggest endorsers are very liberal people from Notre Dame and other places. So I think she's going to be fantastic. We have plenty of time. Even if we did it after the election itself, I have a lot of time after the election, as you know.

So I think that she will be outstanding. She's going to be as good as anybody that has served on that court. We really feel that. We have a professor at Notre Dame, highly respected by all; said she's the single greatest student he's ever had. He's been a professor for a long time at a great school.

And we just -- we won the election and therefore we have the right to choose her, and very few people knowingly would say otherwise.

And by the way, the Democrats, they wouldn't even think about not doing it. If they had -- the only difference is they'd try and do it faster. There's no way they would give it up. They had Merrick Garland, but the problem is they didn't have the election. So they were stopped.

And probably that would happen in reverse also. Definitely it would happen in reverse. So we won the election and we have the right to do it, Chris.

WALLACE: President Trump, thank you. Same question to you, Vice President Biden. You have two minutes.

BIDEN: Well, first of all, thank you for doing this and looking forward to this, Mr. President.

TRUMP: Thank you, Joe.

BIDEN: I -- the American people have a right to have a say in who the Supreme Court nominee is. And that say occurs when they vote for a -- United States senators and when they vote for the president of United States. They're not going to get that chance now because we're in the middle of an election already. The election has already started. Tens of thousands of people have already voted, and so the thing that should happen is we should wait. We should wait and see what the outcome of this election is.

Because that's the only way the American people get to express their view is by who they elect as president and who they elect as vice president.

Now, what's at stake here is the president has made it clear he wants to get rid of the Affordable Care Act. He's been running on that, he ran on that, and he's been governing on that. He's in the Supreme Court right now trying to get rid of the Affordable Care Act, which will strip 20 million people from having insurance -- health insurance now, if it -- if they -- if it goes into court.

And -- and the justice -- and I have nothing -- I'm not opposed to the justice, as she seems like a very fine person. But she's written before she went into the bench -- which is her right -- that she thinks that the Affordable Care Act is not constitutional. The other thing that's on the court -- and if it's struck down, what happens. Women's rights are fundamentally changed. Once again, a woman could be held -- pay more money because she has a pre-existing condition, a pregnancy.

BIDEN: We're able -- they're able to charge women more for the same exact procedure a man did -- gets. And that ended when we, in fact, passed the Affordable Care Act. And there's 100 million people who have pre-existing conditions, and they'll be taken away as well, those pre-existing conditions; insurance companies are going to love this. And so it's just not appropriate to do this before this election. If he wins the election and the Senate is Democrat or Republican, then he goes forward. If not, we should wait until February.

WALLACE: All right (ph).

TRUMP: There aren't 100 million people with pre-existing condition. As far as say is concerned, the people already had their say. They -- OK.

Justice Ginsburg said very powerfully, very strongly, at some point, 10 years ago or so, she said a president and the Senate is elected for period of time but a president is elected for four years.

We're not elected for three years. I'm not elected for three years. So, we have the Senate, we have president --

BIDEN: He's elected to the next election.

TRUMP: -- during that period of time, during that period of time, we have an opening. I'm not elected for three years, I'm elected for four years. And 100 million people --

BIDEN: The election has already started --

TRUMP: Joe, the 100 million people is totally wrong. I don't know where you got that number.

The bigger problem that you have is that you're going to extinguish 180 million people with their private health care that they're very happy with.

BIDEN: That's simply not true.

TRUMP: Well, you're simply going to socialist -- you're going to socialist --

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: We're now into -- gentlemen, we're now into open discussion.

BIDEN: Open discussion.

WALLACE: Open discussion, yes, I agree.

Go ahead, Vice President Biden.

BIDEN: Number one, he knows that -- what I proposed. What I proposed is that we expand Obamacare and we increase it. We do not wipe any -- and one of the big debates we had with 23 of my colleagues trying to win back the nomination that I won, were saying that Biden wanted to allow people to have private insurance still. They can, they do, they will under my proposal.

TRUMP: That's not what you've said and it's not what your party has said.

BIDEN: That is simply a lie.

TRUMP: Your party doesn't say it. Your party wants to go socialist medicine.

BIDEN: My party is me.

TRUMP: And socialist health care.

BIDEN: Right now, I am the Democratic Party.

TRUMP: And they're going to dominate you, Joe, you know that.

BIDEN: I am the Democratic Party right now. The platform of the Democratic Party --

TRUMP: Not according to Harris.

BIDEN: -- is what I, in fact, approved of. What I approved of.

Now here's the deal: the deal is that it's going to wipe out pre-existing conditions.

And by the way, the 20 -- the 200 million -- the 200,000 people that have died on his watch, they're -- how many of those and -- that have survived? Well, 7 million people have contracted COVID. What does it mean for them going forward if you strike down the Affordable Care Act?

TRUMP: Joe, you've had 308,000 military people dying because you couldn't provide them proper health care in the military. So don't tell me about this.

BIDEN: I'm happy to talk about this.

TRUMP: And if you were here, it wouldn't be 200. It would be 2 million people because you were very late on the draw.

BIDEN: Late on the draw.

TRUMP: You didn't want me to ban China, which was heavily infected. You didn't want me to ban Europe which was heavily infected.

WALLACE: All right, gentlemen --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: You would have been much later, Joe. Much later.

WALLACE: Mr. President, Mr. President --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: We're talking about 2 million people.

BIDEN: You're not going to --

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Mr. President, as a moderator, we are going to talk about COVID in the next segment but go ahead.

BIDEN: Let me finish. The point is that the president also is opposed to Roe v. Wade. That's on the ballot as well, in the court, in the court. And so, that's also at stake right now.

And so, the election is already begun.

TRUMP: You don't know what's on the ballot. Why is it on the ballot?

BIDEN: Because -- because you've said --

TRUMP: Why is it on the ballot? It's not on the ballot.

BIDEN: It's on the ballot, in the court.

TRUMP: I don't think so.

BIDEN: In the court. Well --

TRUMP: There's nothing happening there.

BIDEN: Donald, would you just (inaudible) --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: And you don't know her view on Roe v. Wade. You don't know her view.

BIDEN: I don't know --

WALLACE: Well, all right, let's -- all right. Let's talk -- I would -- we've got a lot to unpack here, gentlemen. We got a lot of time. So --

(LAUGHTER)

WALLACE: On health care, and then we'll come back to Roe v. Wade.

BIDEN: All right.

WALLACE: Mr. President, the Supreme Court will hear a case a week after the election in which the Trump administration, along with 18 state attorneys general are seeking to overturn --

TRUMP: That's right.

WALLACE: -- Obamacare, to end Obamacare. You had spent the last --

TRUMP: Because they want to give good health care --

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: If I may ask that question, sir.

TRUMP: Go ahead.

BIDEN: Good health care.

WALLACE: Over the last four years, you have promised to repeal and replace Obamacare but you have never in these four years come up with a plan, a comprehensive plan --

TRUMP: Of course, I have.

WALLACE: -- to replace Obamacare.

TRUMP: Of course, I have.

WALLACE: Well, I'll give you an --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: I got rid of the individual mandate.

WALLACE: -- when I finish, I'm going to give you an opportunity --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Excuse me. I got rid of the individual mandate which was a big chunk of Obama --

WALLACE: That is not a comprehensive plan.

TRUMP: That is absolutely a big thing. That was the worst part of Obamacare.

WALLACE: I didn't ask --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Chris, that was the worst part of Obama --

WALLACE: Sir, you're debating him, not me. Let me ask my question --

TRUMP: Well, I'll ask Joe.

WALLACE: No --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: The individual mandate was the most unpopular aspect of Obamacare. I got rid of it. And we will protect people with preexisting condition.

WALLACE: I'm the moderator of this debate and I would like you to let me ask my question and then you can answer your --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Go ahead.

WALLACE: You, in the course of these four years have never come up with a comprehensive plan to replace Obamacare and just this last Thursday, you signed a largely symbolic executive order to protect people with pre-existing conditions five days before this debate.

So my question, sir, is what is the Trump health care plan?

TRUMP: All right. Well, first of all, I guess I'm debating you, not him. But that's OK. I'm not surprise.

Let me just tell you something, that there's nothing symbolic. I'm cutting drug prices. I'm going with favored nations which no president has the courage to do because you're going against big pharma.

Drug prices will be coming down 80 or 90%. You could have done it during your 47-year period in government, but you didn't do it. Nobody has done it. So we are cutting health care...

WALLACE: What about pre-existing conditions?

TRUMP: All of the things that we've done...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: I'll give you an example, insulin. It's going to -- it was destroying families, destroying people, the cost. I am getting it for so cheap, it's like water, you want to know the truth. So cheap. Take a look at all of the drugs that -- what we're doing. Prescription drug prices, we're going to allow our governors now to go to other countries to buy drugs because they pay just a tiny fraction that we do.

WALLACE: As I say, this is open discussion. Let me ask you about...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: This is big stuff.

WALLACE: Sir, you'll be happy, I'm about to pick up on one of your points to ask the vice president, which is, he points out that you would like to add a public option to Obamacare, and the argument that he makes and other Republicans make is that that is going to end private insurance and will...

BIDEN: It is not. Sorry.

WALLACE: If I can ask you the question. It will end...

TRUMP: Not what your party says, by the way.

WALLACE: It will end private insurance and create a government takeover of health care.

BIDEN: It does not. It's only for those people who are so poor they qualify for Medicaid, they can get that free in most states except governors who want to deny people who are poor Medicaid. Anyone who qualifies for Medicare -- excuse me, Medicaid would automatically be enrolled in the public option.

The vast majority of the American people would still not be in that option. Number one. Number two...

TRUMP: Joe, you agreed with Bernie Sanders's far left on the manifesto, we call it.

BIDEN: Manifesto? Look...

TRUMP: And that gives you socialized medicine.

BIDEN: Look, hey, I'm not going to listen to him. The fact of the matter is I beat Bernie Sanders...

TRUMP: Not by much.

BIDEN: I beat him by a whole hell of a lot. I'm here standing facing you, old buddy.

TRUMP: If "Pocahontas" would've left two days early, you would've lost every primary.

BIDEN: All he knows how to do is hurt...

TRUMP: On Super Tuesday, you got very lucky.

BIDEN: Look, here's the deal. I got very lucky, I'm going to get very lucky tonight as well. And tonight I'm going to make sure because here's the deal.

TRUMP: With what?

BIDEN: Here's the deal. The fact is that everything he is saying so far is simply a lie. I'm not here to call out his lies. Everybody knows he's a liar.

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: I just want to make sure...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: ... last in your class, not first in your class.

BIDEN: God. I want to make sure...

WALLACE: Mr. President, can you let him finish, sir?

BIDEN: No, he doesn't know how to do that. He has...

TRUMP: You'd be surprised. You'd be surprised. Go ahead, Joe...

BIDEN: The wrong guy, the wrong night, at the wrong time.

TRUMP: Listen, you agreed with Bernie Sanders...

BIDEN: Here's the deal...

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: There is no manifesto, number one.

WALLACE: Please let him speak, Mr. President.

BIDEN: Number two...

TRUMP: You just lost the left.

BIDEN: Number two...

TRUMP: You just lost the left. You agreed with Bernie Sanders on a plan that's absolutely...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: ... socialized medicine.

WALLACE: Mr. President...

BIDEN: I'll tell you what, he is not for any help for people needing health care. Because his...

TRUMP: Who, Bernie?

BIDEN: Because he, in fact, already has cost 10 million people their health care that they had from their employers because of his recession, number one. Number two, there are 20 million people getting health care through Obamacare now that he wants to take it away. He won't ever look you in the eye and say that's what he wants to do, take it away. Number three...

TRUMP: No, I want to give them better health care at a much lower price because Obamacare is no good.

BIDEN: He doesn't know how. He doesn't know how to do that.

TRUMP: I've already fixed it.

BIDEN: He has never offered a plan.

TRUMP: I've already fixed it to an extent.

BIDEN: He has never done a single thing.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: ... as you might know, but probably don't, Obamacare...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Gentlemen, you realize that you are both speaking at the same time. Let the president -- go ahead, sir.

TRUMP: Obamacare is no good, we made it better. And I had a choice to make very early on. We took away the individual mandate. We guarantee pre-existing conditions...

BIDEN: Not true.

TRUMP: ... but took away the individual mandate. Listen, this is the way it is. And that destroyed -- they shouldn't even call it Obamacare. I had a choice to make, do I let my people run it really well or badly? If I run a badly they will probably blame him but they will blame me. But more importantly, I want to help people, OK?

I said, you've going to run it so well.

BIDEN: That's what he's known for.

TRUMP: And I just had a meeting with them. They said, the problem is no matter how well you run Obamacare, it's a disaster. It's too expensive, premiums are too high...

WALLACE: I've got to...

TRUMP: ... that it doesn't work. So we do want to get rid of it.

WALLACE: I...

TRUMP: Chris, we want to get rid of it and do something that's cheaper and better.

WALLACE: I have to give you roughly equal time. Please let the vice president talk, sir.

TRUMP: Good.

BIDEN: He has no plan for health care.

TRUMP: Of course we do.

BIDEN: He sends...

WALLACE: Please.

BIDEN: He sends out wishful thinking. He has executive orders that have no power. He hasn't lowered drug costs for anybody. He has been promising a health care plan since he got elected. He has none. Like almost everything else he talks about. He does not have a plan. He doesn't have a plan.

And the fact is this man doesn't know what he's talking about. He's...

WALLACE: All right. I have one final question for you, Mr. Vice President. If Senate Republicans -- we were talking originally about the Supreme Court here. If Senate Republicans go ahead and confirm Justice Barrett, there has been talk about ending the filibuster or even packing the court, adding to the nine justices there. You called this a distraction by the president, but in fact it wasn't brought up by the president; it was brought up by some of your Democratic colleagues in the Congress.

BIDEN: I'm saying...

WALLACE: So my question to you, is you have refused in the past to talk about it. Are you willing to tell the American people tonight whether or not you will support either ending the filibuster, or packing the court...

BIDEN: Whatever the position I take on that, that will become the issue. The issue is the American people should speak. You should go out and vote. You're in voting now. Vote and let your senators know how strongly you feel. Vote now. Make sure you in fact let people know.

TRUMP: He doesn't want to answer the question.

BIDEN: I'm not going to answer that question because...

TRUMP: Why wouldn't you answer that question?

BIDEN: The question is...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: The radical left...

BIDEN: Would you shut up, man?

TRUMP: Who is on your list, Joe? Who's on your list?

BIDEN: this is so unpresidential.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: He's not going to give a list.

WALLACE: We have ended this segment; we are going to go onto the second segment.

TRUMP: That was really a productive segment, wasn't it?

(LAUGHTER)

BIDEN: Keep yapping, man.

TRUMP: The people understand, Joe. Forty-seven years, you've done nothing, they understand.

WALLACE: All right, the second subject is COVID-19, which is an awfully serious subject so let's try to be serious about it. We have had more than 7 million cases of coronavirus in the United States and more than 200,000 people have died. Even after we produce a vaccine, experts say that it could be months or even years before we come back to anything approaching normal.

My question for both of you, is based on what you have said and done so far and what you have said you would do starting in 2021, why should the American people trust you more than your opponent to deal with this public health crisis going forward? In this case, the question goes it to you first, sir. Two minutes, uninterrupted.

BIDEN: Good luck. Two hundred thousand dead. As you said, more than 7 million infected in the United States. We in fact have 5 percent -- we're 4 percent of the world's population -- 20 percent of the deaths. Forty thousand people a day or contracting COVID. In addition to that, about between 750 and 1,000 people a day are dying. When he was presented with that number, he said it is what it is. Well, it is what it is, because you are who you are. That's why it is.

The president has no plan. He hasn't laid out anything. He knew all the way back in February how serious this crisis was. He knew it was a deadly disease. What did he do? He's on tape as acknowledging he knew it. He said he didn't tell us or give people a warning about it because he didn't want to panic and the American people. You don't panic; he panicked. In addition to that, what did he do?

He went in and he -- we were insisting that the -- the -- the people we had on the ground in China should be able to go to Wuhan and determine for themselves how dangerous this was. He did not even ask Xi to do that. He told us what a great job Xi was doing. He said we owe him a debt of gratitude for being so transparent with us. And what did he do then? He then did nothing -- he waited and waited and waited. He still doesn't have a plan.

TRUMP: Well...

WALLACE: Sir, just a minute.

BIDEN: I laid out back in March exactly what we should be doing. And I laid out again in July what we should be doing. We should be providing all the protective gear possible. We should be providing the money the House has passed in order to be able to go out and get people the help they need to keep their businesses open. Open schools, it cost a lot of money. You should get out of your bunker and out of the sand trap and your golf course and go in the Oval Office and bring together the Democrats and Republicans and fund what needs to be done now to save lives.

TRUMP: So if would have listened to you...

WALLACE: Wait, you have 2 minutes, sir.

TRUMP: If we would've listened to you, the country would've been left wide open, millions of people would've died, not 200,000. And one person is too much. It's China's fault. It should've never happened. They stopped it from (ph) going in, but it was China's fault.

And by the way when you talk about numbers, you don't know how many people died in China, you don't know how many people died in Russia, you don't know how many people died in India -- they don't exactly give you straight counts, just so you understand. But if you look at what we've done, I closed it and you said he's xenophobic; he's a racist and he's xenophobic because you didn't think...

BIDEN: That's unrelated to your...

TRUMP: ...should have closed our country.

WALLACE: (Inaudible) it's his two minutes.

TRUMP: You didn't think we should have closed our country because you thought it was too -- it was terrible. You wouldn't have closed it for another two months. By my doing it early, in fact, Dr. Fauci said President Trump saved thousands of lives. Many of your Democrat governors said President Trump did a phenomenal job.

(LAUGHTER)

We worked with the governor -- oh, really? Go take a look.

(LAUGHTER)

Their governors said I did a phenomenal job. Most of them said that.

(LAUGHTER)

In fact, people that would not be necessarily on my side said that, "President Trump did a phenomenal job."

We did. We got the gowns; we got the masks; we made the ventilators. You wouldn't have made ventilators. And now we're weeks away from a vaccine. We're doing therapeutics already. Fewer people are dying when they get sick. Far fewer people are dying. We've done a great job.

The only thing I haven't done a good job -- and that's because of the fake news. No matter what you say to them, they give you bad press on it. It's just fake news. They give you good press; they give me bad press, because that's the way it is, unfortunately.

But let me just tell you something -- I don't care; I've gotten used to it -- but I'll tell you, Joe, you could never have done the job that we did. You don't have it in your blood. You could have never done that job.

BIDEN: I know how to do the job. I know how to get the job done.

TRUMP: Well, you didn't do very well in swine flu.

BIDEN: And...

TRUMP: H1N1, you were a disaster. Your own chief of staff said...

BIDEN: Fourteen thousand...

TRUMP: ... you were a disaster.

BIDEN: Fourteen thousand people died, not 200,000. There was no economic recession.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Let -- sir, you...

TRUMP: Far less...

WALLACE: You made a point. Let him answer it.

BIDEN: And there was no one -- there was no -- we didn't shut down the economy. This is his economy that's being -- he shut down. The reason it's shut down is because, look, you folks at home, how many of you got up this morning and had an empty chair at the kitchen table because someone died of COVID?

How many of you are in a situation where you lost your mom or dad and you couldn't even speak to them; you had a nurse holding a phone up so you could in fact say goodbye?

TRUMP: You would have lost far more people.

BIDEN: How many people...

TRUMP: Far more people.

BIDEN: That is...

TRUMP: And you would have been months late.

BIDEN: And -- and by the way...

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: ... your own -- his own -- his own CDC director says we could lose as many as another 200,000 people between now and the end of the year. And he held it up and he said, "If we just wear a mask, we can save half those numbers" -- just a mask.

And by the way, in terms of the whole notion of a vaccine, we're for a vaccine, but we -- I don't trust him at all, nor do you. I know you don't. What we trust is a scientist. We trust Dr. Fauci.

TRUMP: You don't trust Johnson and Johnson, Pfizer?

BIDEN: We -- and, by the way...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Gentlemen -- gentlemen, let me move on to questions about the future, because you both have touched on one of the -- two of the questions I'm going to ask. Focusing on the future first, President Trump, you have repeatedly either contradicted or been at odds with some of your government's own top scientists. The week before last, the head of the Centers for Disease Control, Dr. Redfield, said it would be summer before the vaccine would become generally available to the public.

You said that he was confused and mistaken. Those were your two words.

TRUMP: Yeah.

WALLACE: But Dr. Slaoui, the head of your Operation Warp Speed, has said exactly the same thing. Are they both wrong?

TRUMP: Well, I've spoken to the companies and we can have it a lot sooner. It's a very political thing, because people like this would rather make it political then save lives.

BIDEN: God.

TRUMP: It is a very political thing. I've spoken to Pfizer. I've spoken to all of the people that you have to speak to. We have great -- Moderna, Johnson and Johnson, and others. They can go faster than that by a lot. It's become very political because the Left -- or I don't know if I'd call them left, or...

WALLACE: So you're suggesting that the head of your Operation Warp Speed, Dr. Slaoui...

TRUMP: I disagree with him. Yeah. No, I disagree with both of them. And he didn't say that. He said it could be there, but it could also be much sooner. I had him in my office two days ago.

WALLACE: He talked about the summer, sir, before it's generally available, just like Dr. Redfield.

TRUMP: He said it's a possibility that we'll have the answer before November 1st. It could also be after that.

WALLACE: I'm talking about when it's generally available, not when...

TRUMP: Well, we're going to deliver it right away. We have the military all set up. Logistically, they're all set up. We have our military that delivers soldiers and they can do 200,000 a day. They're going to be...

BIDEN: This is the same man...

TRUMP: It's all set up.

BIDEN: ... who told you, by Easter, this would be gone away, by the warm weather, it would be gone -- miraculous, like a miracle. And, by the way, maybe you could inject some bleach in your arm and that would take care of it. This is the same man. TRUMP: That was said sarcastically and you know that.

BIDEN: That was...

TRUMP: That was said sarcastically.

BIDEN: And so here's the deal. This man is talking about a vaccine. Every serious -- every serious company is talking about maybe having a vaccine done by the end of the year. But the distribution of that vaccine will not occur until sometime beginning or the middle of next year to get it out, if we get the vaccine, and pray God we will.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Mr. Vice President, I want to pick up...

TRUMP: You'll have the vaccine sooner than that.

WALLACE: I want to pick up on this question, though. You say the public can trust the scientists, but they can't trust President Trump. In fact, you said that again tonight.

Your running mate, Senator Harris, goes further, saying the public health experts, quote, "will be muzzled, will be suppressed."

Given the fact that polls already show that people are concerned about the vaccine and are reluctant to take it, are you and your running mate Senator Harris contributing to that fear?

BIDEN: No more than the question you just asked him. You pointed out, he puts pressure and disagrees with his own scientists.

WALLACE: But you're saying...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: ... Senator Harris is saying you can't trust the scientists.

BIDEN: No, no, you can trust the scientists. She didn't say that. You can trust the scientists.

WALLACE: She said that public health experts --

TRUMP: She did say that.

WALLACE: -- quote, will be muzzled, will be suppressed.

BIDEN: Yes, well, that's what he's going to try to do. But there's millions of scientists -- there's thousands of scientists out there, like here at this great hospital, that don't work for him. Their job doesn't depend on him. That's not -- they're the people -- they're -- and by the way --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: We spoke to the scientists that are in charge.

BIDEN: And by the way -- and --

TRUMP: They will have the vaccine very soon.

WALLACE: Just let him finish.

BIDEN: Do you believe for a moment what he's telling you in light of all the lies he's told you about the whole issue relating to COVID? He still hasn't even acknowledged that he knew this was happening, knew how dangerous it was going to be back in February and he didn't even tell you. He's on record as saying it.

He panicked or he just looked at the stock market, one of the two. Because guess what, a lot of people died and a lot more are going to die unless he gets a lot smarter, a lot quicker --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: So --

WALLACE: Mr. President?

TRUMP: Did you use the word smart? So you went to Delaware State but you forgot the name of your college.

(LAUGHTER)

You didn't go to Delaware State. You graduated either the lowest or the lowest in your class. Don't ever use the word smart with me. Don't ever use that word.

BIDEN: Oh, give me a break man.

TRUMP: Because you know what, there's nothing smart about you, Joe. Forty-seven years, you've done nothing.

BIDEN: Well, let's to --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: And if you would have had -- let me just tell you something, Joe. If you would have had the charge of what I was put through, I had to close the greatest economy in the history of our country. And by the way, now it's being built again and it's going up fast --

BIDEN: You see, he's --

WALLACE: We're going after the economy in the next segment, sir.

BIDEN: OK.

TRUMP: It's going up fast --

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: OK.

TRUMP: -- look forward to --

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: When it comes to how the virus has been handled so far the two of you have taken very different approaches and this is going to affect how the virus is handled going forward by whichever of you ends up becoming the next president. I want to quickly go through several of those.

Reopenings, Vice President Biden, you have been much more reluctant than President Trump about reopening the economy and schools. Why, sir?

BIDEN: Because he doesn't have a plan. If I were running it, I'd know how -- what the plan is. You've got to provide these businesses the ability to have the money to be able to reopen with, the PPE as well as with the sanitation they need. You have to provide them --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Tell that to Nancy Pelosi.

BIDEN: Will he just shush for a minute?

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Tell it to Nancy Pelosi and Schumer --

BIDEN: And by the way --

TRUMP: -- crying Chuck.

BIDEN: Nancy Pelosi and Schumer, they have a plan. He won't even meet with them. The Republicans won't meet with him in the Senate --

WALLACE: OK --

BIDEN: And he -- and he sits -- he sits in his golf course, and I mean literally, think about it --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: You probably play more than I do, Joe.

BIDEN: Think about it.

(LAUGHTER)

WALLACE: What about this question about reopening and the fact --

TRUMP: Well, he wants to shut down this country and I want to keep it open --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: And we did a great thing by shutting it down --

BIDEN: He just admitted he shut it down --

WALLACE: Let -- let him finish, sir.

TRUMP: Wait a minute, Joe. Let me shut you down for a second, Joe, just for one second. We want to -- he wants to shut down the country. We just went through it. We had to because we didn't know anything about the disease.

Now, we found that elderly people with heart problems and diabetes and different problems are very, very vulnerable. We learned a lot. Young children aren't, even younger people aren't -- we've learned a lot. But he wants to shut it down.

More people will be hurt by continuing -- if you look at Pennsylvania -- if you look at certain states that have been shut down, they have Democrat governors all. One of the reasons they shut down is because they want to keep it shut down until after the election on November 3rd --

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: I want to move onto another subject --

TRUMP: -- because it's a political thing.

WALLACE: I want to move onto another subject --

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: I've got to respond to that.

TRUMP: But those states --

WALLACE: I want to move --

TRUMP: Those states are not doing well that are shut down.

WALLACE: Gentlemen, I want to move onto another subject --

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: I've got to respond to that.

WALLACE: -- which is masks.

TRUMP: He wants to shut down the whole country --

WALLACE: President Trump, you have begun to increasingly question the effectiveness of masks as a disease preventer. And in fact, recently you have cited the issue of -- of waiters touching their masks and touching plates. Are you questioning the efficacy of masks?

TRUMP: No, I think that masks are OK. You have to understand, if you look -- I mean, I have a mask right here. I put a mask on, you know, when I think I need it.

(LAUGHTER)

Tonight, as an example, everybody's had a test and you've had social distancing and all of the things that you have to, but --

BIDEN: Just like your rallies.

TRUMP: -- I wear masks when needed. When needed, I wear masks.

WALLACE: OK, let me ask --

TRUMP: I don't have -- I don't wear masks like him. Every time you see him, he's got a mask. He could be speaking 200 feet away from them and he shows up with the biggest mask I've ever seen.

(LAUGHTER)

I will say --

WALLACE: Vice President --

TRUMP: -- I look (ph) at like this (ph) --

WALLACE: -- Vice President Biden, go ahead, sir.

BIDEN: Look, the way to open businesses is give them the wherewithal to be able to open. We provide money that Congress --

WALLACE: But I was asking you, sir, about masks.

BIDEN: Well, masks -- masks make a big difference. His own head of the CDC said if we just wore a mask between now -- if they're -- everybody wore a mask and social distanced between now and January, we'd probably save up to 100,000 lives. It matters. It matters.

TRUMP: And they've also said the opposite. They've also said the opposite.

BIDEN: And no -- no serious person said the opposite. No serious person --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: So we'll look at -- look at Dr. Fauci -- Dr. Fauci said the opposite --

BIDEN: He did not say the opposite.

WALLACE: I want to ask you --

TRUMP: He said very strongly --

WALLACE: -- we've got a little bit longer than a minute left in this segment.

TRUMP: -- masks are not good. Then, he changed his mind. He said masks are good --

WALLACE: I want to ask --

TRUMP: I'm OK with masks. I'm not fighting masks.

WALLACE: I want to ask you both about one last subject because your different approaches has even affected the way that you have campaigned. President Trump, you're holding the large rallies with crowds packed together, thousands of people.

TRUMP: Outside.

WALLACE: Outside. Yes, sir. Agreed. Vice President Biden, you are holding much smaller events with -

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Because nobody will show up.

WALLACE: -- people with masks.

(LAUGHTER)

TRUMP: Well it's true. Nobody shows up to his rallies.

WALLACE: All right. In any case, why are you holding the big rallies? Why you not? You go first, sir.

TRUMP: Because people want to hear what I have to say. I mean -

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: (inaudible)

WALLACE: But are you not worried about it spreading disease?

TRUMP: -- I've done a great job as a president and I'll have 25,000, 35,000 people show up at airports. We use airports and hangars.

WALLACE: Are you not worried about the disease issue, sir?

TRUMP: We have a lot of people -- well, so far we have had no problem whatsoever. It's outside. That's a big difference. According to the experts, we do them outside. We have tremendous crowds as you see. I mean, every -- and literally in 24 hours notice, and Joe does the circles and has three people some place.

WALLACE: OK.

BIDEN: By the way, did you -- did you -

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Got you.

BIDEN: _- see one of the last big rallies he had and a reporter came up to him to ask him a question. He said, "No, no, no. Stand back. Put on your mask. Put on a mask. Have you been tested?" I'm way -- I'm way far away from those other people. That's what he said. I can't. I'm going to be OK. He's not worried about you. He's not worried about the people out there breathing on one another, cheek to jowl.

TRUMP: We've had no negative effect.

BIDEN: No negative effect. Come on.

TRUMP: We've had no negative effect, and we've had --

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Well --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: -- 35,000, 40,000 people at these rallies.

WALLACE: -- you want to just quickly finish up -

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: Yes.

WALLACE: -- because I want to move on to our next question?

BIDEN: Yes, I would. He's been totally irresponsible the way in which he has handled the social distancing and people wearing masks, basically encouraging them not to.

WALLACE: All right.

BIDEN: He's been -- he's a fool on this.

TRUMP: If you could get the crowds, you would have done the same thing, but you can't. Nobody cares.

WALLACE: Gentlemen, can we move on to the -

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Nobody cares.

WALLACE: Gentlemen, can we move onto the economy?

TRUMP: Yes.

WALLACE: The economy is, I think it's fair to say, recovering faster than expected from the shutdown -

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Much faster.

WALLACE: -- in the second quarter. The unemployment rate fell to 8.4 percent last month. The Federal Reserve says the hit to growth, which is going to be there, is not going to be nearly as big as they had expected. President Trump, you say we are in a V-shaped recovery. Vice President Biden, you say it's more of a K-shape. What difference does that mean to the American people in terms of the economy? President Trump, in this segment you go first.

TRUMP: So we built the greatest economy in history. We closed it down because of the China plague. When the plague came in, we closed it down, which was very hard psychologically to do. He didn't think we should close it down, and he was wrong. And again, two million people would be dead now instead of -- still 204,000 people is too much. One person is too much. It should have never happened from China, but what happened is we closed it down and now we're reopening, and we're doing record business. We had 10.4 million in a four-month period that we've put back into the workforce. That's a record the likes of which nobody's ever seen before, and he wants to close down the -- he will shut it down again. He will destroy this country.

You know, a lot of people between drugs and alcohol and depression, when you start shutting it down you take a look at what's happening at some of your Democrat-run states where they have these tough shutdowns, and I'm telling you it's because they don't want to open it. One of them came out last week -- you saw that -- we're going to up on November 9. Why November 9? Because it's after the election. They think they're hurting us by keeping them closed. They're hurting people. People know what to do. They can social distance. They can wash their hands. They can wear masks. They can do whatever they want, but they got to open these states up. When you look at North Carolina, when you look -- and these governors are under siege -- Pennsylvania, Michigan, and a couple of others, you've got to open these states up. It's not fair. You're talking about almost it's like being in prison.

And you look at what's going on with divorce, look at what's going on with alcoholism and drugs, it's a very, very sad thing. And he'll close down the whole country. This guy will close down the whole country and destroy our country. Our country is coming back incredibly well, setting records as it does it. We don't need somebody to come in and say let's shut it down.

WALLACE: All right, your two minutes, sir. We're now moved to you. As I -- as I said posing the question, the president says it's a V-shape recovery. You say it's a K-shaped recovery. What's the difference?

BIDEN: The difference is millionaires and billionaires like him in the middle of the COVID crisis have done very well, and other billionaires have raised -- have made another $300 billion because of his profligate tax proposal and he only focuses on the market. But you folks at home, you folks living in Scranton and Claymont and all the small towns and working-class towns in America, how well are you doing? This guy paid --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Well.

BIDEN: -- a total of $750 in taxes.

TRUMP: That's wrong.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Sir, sir, no. Wait, no. Sir it's his turn -

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: The economy --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: It's just (ph) a wrong statement.

WALLACE: Yes, I understand. You've agreed to the two minutes, so please let him have it.

BIDEN: Do I get my time back?

The fact is that he has, in fact, worked on this in a way that he's going to be the first President of the United States to leave office having fewer jobs in his administration than when he became president. First one in American history.

Secondly, the people who have lost their jobs are those people who have been on the front lines. Those people who have been saving our lives, those people who have been out there dying. People who have been putting themselves in the way to make sure that we could all try to make it.

And the idea that he is insisting that we -- and go forward and open when you have almost half the states in America with a significant increase in COVID deaths and COVID cases in the United States of America.

And he wants to open it up more. Why does he want to open it up. Why doesn't he take care of the -- you can't fix the economy until you fix the COVID crisis. And he has no intention of doing anything about making it better for you all at home in terms of your health and your safety.

Schools, why are schools open, because it cost a lot money to open them safely. You know they were going to give -- his administration were going to give the teachers in school students masks. And then they decided no, couldn't do that because it's not a national emergency. Not a national emergency.

They've done nothing to help small businesses, nothing, they're closing. One in six is now gone. He ought to get on the job and take care of the needs of the American people so we can open safely.

WALLACE: All right. Your time is up, sir. We are going to get to ...

TRUMP: Well, I have to respond to that.

WALLACE: Well, you both had two minutes, sir.

TRUMP: Excuse me, he made a statement.

WALLACE: So did you.

TRUMP: People want their schools -- no. People want their schools open. They don't want to be shutdown. They don't want their states shutdown. They want their restaurants. I look at New York, it's so sad what's happening in New York.

It's almost like a ghost town and I'm not sure it can ever recover what they've done in New York. People want their places open. They want to get back to their lives.

BIDEN: People want to be safe.

TRUMP: They'll be careful but they want their schools open.

BIDEN: People want to be safe.

TRUMP: I'm the one that brought back football. By the way, I brought back big fan football. It was me and I'm very happy to do it and the people of Ohio are very proud of me and ...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: We're going to get back with the gentleman -- we're going to get to your economic plans going forward in a moment. But first, Mr. President, as you well know there's a new report that in 2016, the year you were elected president and 2017 your first year as president, that you paid $750 a year in federal income tax each of those years.

I know that you pay a lot of other taxes but I'm asking you this specific question, is it true that you pay $750 in Federal income taxes each of those two years.

TRUMP: I've paid millions of dollars in taxes, millions of dollars of income tax. And let me just tell you, there was a story in one of the papers ...

BIDEN: Show us your tax returns.

TRUMP: ... I paid -- I paid $38 million one year. I paid $27 million one year.

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: Show us your tax returns.

TRUMP: I went -- you'll see it as soon as it's finished. You'll see it. You know if you wanted to, go to the Board of Elections, there's 118 page or so report that says everything I have, every bank I have. I'm totally underleveraged because the assets are extremely good and we have a very -- we have -- I built a great company.

WALLACE: Sir, I'm asking you a specific question, which is ...

TRUMP: But let me tell you ...

WALLACE: I understand all of that -- I understand all of that ...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: But let me ...

WALLACE: No, Mr. President ...

TRUMP: Go ahead.

WALLACE: ... I'm asking you a question. Will you tell us how much you paid in federal income taxes in 2016 and 2017?

TRUMP: Millions of dollars.

WALLACE: You paid millions of dollars?

TRUMP: Millions of dollars, yes.

WALLACE: So not $750?

TRUMP: Millions of dollars and you'll get to see it -- and you'll get to see it.

BIDEN: When?

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: But let me just tell you -- Chris, let me just you something that it was the tax laws -- I don't want to pay tax -- before I came here I was a private developer, I was a private business people. Like every other private person, unless they're stupid, they go through the laws and that's what it is. He passed a tax bill that gave us all these privileges for depreciation and for tax credits.

We build a building and we get tax credits like the hotel on Pennsylvania Avenue, you get a massive ...

WALLACE: OK.

TRUMP: .... which by the way, was given to me by the Obama administration if you can believe that. Now the man got fired right after that happened ...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: No, no, let -- Vice President Biden, you want to respond?

BIDEN: Yes, I do want to respond. Look, the tax code that made him -- put him in a position that he pays less tax than a school teacher makes -- on the money a school teacher makes is because of him taking -- he says he's smart because he can take advantage of the tax code.

And he does take advantage of the tax code. That's why I'm going to eliminate the Trump tax cuts and we're going to -- I'm going to eliminate those tax cuts.

TRUMP: That's OK (ph).

BIDEN: And make sure that we invest in the people who in fact need the help. People out there need help.

TRUMP: But why didn't you over 20 -- the last 25 years?

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: Because you weren't president ...

TRUMP: Why didn't you do it over the last 25 years?

BIDEN: Because you weren't president screwing things up.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: No, no, no. You were a senator and by the way you were ...

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: You're the worst president America has ever had. Come on.

TRUMP: Hey -- hey, Joe, let me -- let me just say, Joe, I've done more in -- in 47 months I've done more than you've done in 47 years, Joe. We've done things that you never even thought of doing (ph).

WALLACE: OK, gentlemen --

TRUMP: Including fixing the broken military that you gave me, including taking care of your (ph) vets.

WALLACE: Mr. President, we're talking about the economy. I'd like to ask you about your plans going forward because, Mr. Vice President, your economic plan if you were to be elected president focuses a lot on big government, big taxes, big spending.

I want to focus first on the taxes.

You proposed more than $4 trillion over a decade on new taxes on individuals making more than $400,000 a year and on corporations. President Trump says that that kind of an increase in taxes is going to hurt the economy as it's just coming out of a recession.

BIDEN: Well, just take a look at what is the analysis done by Wall Street firms. It points out that my -- my economic plan would create 7 million more jobs than his in four years, number one.

And number two, it would create an additional $1 trillion in economic growth because it would be about buying American. That we have to -- we're going to make this -- the federal government spent $600 billion a year on everything from ships to steel to buildings and the like.

And under my proposal, we're going to make sure that every penny of that has to be made by a company in America.

WALLACE: Respectfully, sir, I'm talking about taxes, not spending.

BIDEN: By the way, I'm going to eliminate a significant number of the tax -- I'm going to make the corporate tax 28 percent. It shouldn't be 21 percent.

You have 19 -- 91 companies, federal -- I mean, in the Fortune 500 who don't pay a single penny in tax, making billions of dollars.

TRUMP: Why didn't you do it before when you were vice president with Obama?

BIDEN: Because -- because you, in fact, passed that. That was your tax proposal.

TRUMP: That's right. I got it -- I got it done, and you know what happened?

BIDEN: Yeah, you got it done.

TRUMP: Our economy boomed like it's never boomed before (ph) --

BIDEN: The economy -- let me finish.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Mr. President, let me -- Mr. President, let me pick up on that. You would continue your free market approach, lower taxes, more deregulation, correct?

BIDEN: Not lower taxes for the American people.

WALLACE: Let me --

TRUMP: Excuse me --

WALLACE: But in Obama's -- you talk about the economy booming, it turns out that in Obama's final three years as president, more jobs were created, a million and a half more jobs than in the first three years of your presidency.

TRUMP: They had the slowest recovery since 19 -- economic recovery, since 1929. It was the slowest recovery.

Also, they took over something that was down here. All you had to do was turn on the lights and you pick up a lot, but they had the slowest economic recovery since 1929.

Let me tell you about the stock market. When the stock market goes up, that means jobs. It also means 401(k)s.

If you got in, if you ever became president with your ideas, you want to terminate my tax -- my taxes, I'll tell you what, you'll lose -- half of the companies that are poured in here will leave, and plenty of the companies --

BIDEN: Half of the companies --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: -- that are already here, they'll leave for other places.

BIDEN: Hardly any companies have --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: They will leave and you will have a depression, the likes of which you've never seen.

BIDEN: Look --

WALLACE: Mr. Vice President?

BIDEN: -- we inherited the worst recession short of a depression in American history. I was asked to bring it back. We were able to have an economic recovery that created the jobs you're talking about.

We handed him a booming economy. He blew it.

TRUMP: It wasn't booming.

BIDEN: He blew it. He blew it.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: It wasn't booming. It was -- it was the weakest recovery --

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Wait, wait, wait. Is it fair to -- is it to fair to say he blew it when, in fact --

TRUMP: When COVID came in.

BIDEN: No --

WALLACE: -- when there was record low unemployment before COVID?

BIDEN: Yeah, because what he did, even before COVID, manufacturing went in the hole. Manufacturing went in a hole, number one.

TRUMP: Excuse me, because wait --

BIDEN: Number two.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Chris --

BIDEN: Number three --

TRUMP: -- they said it would take -- no, you're in number two.

BIDEN: No.

TRUMP: Chris, Chris, they said it would take a --

BIDEN: This guy is --

TRUMP: -- miracle to bring back manufacturing. I brought back 700,000 jobs. They brought back nothing. They gave up on manufacturing. Part of my standard fare He totally gave up on manufacturing.

BIDEN: I'm the guy who brought back the automobile industry.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: All right. Let him in.

BIDEN: We brought -- I was asked to bring back Chrysler and General Motors. We brought them back right here in the state of Ohio and Michigan.

He blew it. They're gone. He blew it. And in fact, they're gone --

TRUMP: Ohio had the best year it's ever had last year. Michigan had the best year they've ever had.

BIDEN: That is not true.

TRUMP: Many car companies came in from Germany --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: -- went to Michigan and went to Ohio.

BIDEN: No, they're not having the --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: And they didn't come in with you.

WALLACE: Mr. Vice President, go ahead.

BIDEN: And so, you take a look at what he's actually done. He's done very little. His trade deals are the same way.

He talks about these great trade deals. You know, he talks about the art of the deal. China has made -- perfected the art of the steal. We have a higher deficit with China now than we did before. We have a highest deficit -- trade deficit with Mexico.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: China ate your lunch, down 18 (ph) percent --

WALLACE: All right, gentlemen --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: And China ate your lunch, Joe, and no wonder, your son goes in and he takes out -- what -- he takes out billions of dollars.

BIDEN: No.

TRUMP: Takes out billions of dollars to manage. He makes millions of dollars.

And also, while we're at it --

BIDEN: It's simply not true.

TRUMP: -- why is it, just out of curiosity, the mayor of Moscow's wife gave your son $3.5 millions.

BIDEN: That's not true.

TRUMP: What did he do to deserve it? What did he do with Burisma to deserve $183,000 a month.

BIDEN: None of that is true. None of that is true.

WALLACE: Let him answer. If not...

BIDEN: None of that is true.

TRUMP: Oh, really?

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Mr. President, please.

BIDEN: Totally discredited. Totally discredited. And by the way...

TRUMP: He didn't get $3.5 million, Joe? He got $3.5 million.

WALLACE: Mr. President...

BIDEN: That is not true.

TRUMP: Really? Oh.

WALLACE: Mr. President, it's an open discussion, please. You've...

TRUMP: It's a fact.

WALLACE: Well, you have raised an issue, let the vice president answer.

BIDEN: Totally discredited.

TRUMP: Did Burisma pay him $183,000 a month with no experience in energy?

WALLACE: Mr. President...

BIDEN: My son did nothing wrong at Burisma.

TRUMP: I think he did.

WALLACE: Mr. President, let him answer.

BIDEN: He doesn't want to let me answer because he knows I have the truth. His position has been totally thoroughly discredited.

TRUMP: By who, the media?

BIDEN: By everybody. And Ukraine. By everybody. Well, by the media, by our allies, by the World Bank, by everyone, has discredited. As a matter fact, matter of fact, even the people who testified...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Mr. President, please stop.

BIDEN: ... under oath, under oath.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Go ahead, I'm listening to you.

BIDEN: He testified under oath, and his administration said, I did my job and I did it very well. I did it honorably.

TRUMP: I'd like to know who they are.

BIDEN: Every -- well, I'll give you the list of the people who have testified.

WALLACE: Go ahead, sir.

BIDEN: You've already fired most of them because they did a good job.

TRUMP: Some people don't do a good job.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Wait a minute, you get the final word, Mr. Vice President.

BIDEN: Well, it's hard to get any word in with this clown. Excuse me, this person.

TRUMP: Hey, let me just say...

WALLACE: No, no, no! Mr. President...

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: That is simply not true.

TRUMP: Why did he deserve $3.5 million from Moscow?

BIDEN: Look, here's the deal. We want to talk about families and ethics. I don't want to do that. I mean, his family we could talk about all night. His family is already...

TRUMP: My family...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: My family lost a fortune by coming down and helping us with government.

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: This is not about my family or his family. It's about your family, the American people. He doesn't...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: ... $3.5 million he does nothing.

BIDEN: That's not true. He doesn't want to talk about what you need. You, the American people. It's about you. That's what we are talking about here. It's not about him.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: All right. That's the end of the segment, we are moving on.

BIDEN: He didn't take that.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Can I be honest? It's a very important question.

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: Try to be honest, it's a good thing.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: No, the answer to the question is no.

TRUMP: Ukraine...

WALLACE: No, I -- sir, sir.

TRUMP: With a billion dollars if you don't get rid of the...

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: That is absolutely not true.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Gentlemen! I hate to raise my voice...

TRUMP: He's on tape...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Why shouldn't I be different than the two of you? So here's the deal.

BIDEN: That's a good point.

WALLACE: We have six segments. We have ended that segment, we're going to go to the next segment. In that segment, you are each going to have two uninterrupted moment. In those two uninterrupted minutes, Mr. President, you can say anything you want. I'm going to ask a question about race, but if you want to say something else, go ahead.

But I think that the country would be better served if we allowed both people to speak with fewer interruptions. I am appealing to you, sir, to do that.

TRUMP: Well, and him too.

WALLACE: Well, frankly, you've been doing more interrupting than he has.

TRUMP: Well, that's all right. But he does plenty.

WALLACE: Well, sir, less than...

TRUMP: He does plenty.

WALLACE: No, less than you have. Let's please continue on.

The issue of race. Vice President Biden, you say that President Trump's response to the violence in Charlottesville three years ago when he talked about "very fine people on both sides" was what directly led you to launch this run for president.

TRUMP: Oh, yes, sure.

WALLACE: President Trump, you have often said that you believe you have done more for Black Americans than any president with a possible exception of Abraham Lincoln. My question for the two of you is why should voters trust you rather than your opponent to deal with the race issues facing this country over the next four years?

Vice President Biden, you go first.

BIDEN: It's about equity and equality. It's about decency. It's about the Constitution. And we have never walked away from trying to require equity for everyone, equality for the whole of America. But we never accomplished it. But we've never walked away from it, like he has done.

It is true, the reason I got in the race is when those people, close your eyes, remember what those people looked like coming out of the fields carrying torches, their veins bulging, just spewing antisemitic bile, and accompanied by the Ku Klux Klan. A young woman got killed. And they asked the president what he thought. He said there were very fine people on both sides. No president has ever said anything like that.

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: Now, second point I'd make to you is that when Floyd was killed, when Mr. Floyd was killed, there was a peaceful protest in front of the White House. What did he do? He came out of his bunker, had the military use tear gas on them so you could walk across to a church and hold up a Bible. And then what happened after that? The bishop of that very church said that it was a disgrace. The general who was with him said all he ever wanted to do is divide people, not unite people at all. This is a president who has used everything as a dog whistle to try to generate racist hatred, racist division.

This is a man who in fact, you talk about helping African-Americans, one in 1,000 African-Americans has been killed because of the coronavirus. And if he doesn't do something quickly, by the end of the year, one in 500 will have been killed. One in 500 African-Americans. This man, this man is a savior of African-Americans? This man cares at all? This man has done virtually nothing. Look, the fact is you have to look at what he talks about. You have to look at what he did, and what he did has been disastrous for the African-American community.

TRUMP: So...

WALLACE: President Trump, you have 2 minutes. Why should Americans trust you over your opponent to deal with racism?

TRUMP: You did a crime bill, 1994, when you call them super predators, African-Americans, super predators, and they've never forgotten it. They've never forgotten it, Joe.

BIDEN: I never sir...

WALLACE: No, sir; it's his two minutes.

TRUMP: So you did that and they called you a super predator and I'm letting people out of jail now that you have treated the African-American population, community, you have treated the black community about as bad as anybody in this country. You did the -- and that's why if you look at the polls, I'm doing better than any Republican has done in a long time because they saw what you did.

You call them super predators and you've called them worse than that because you look back at your testimony over the years, you've called them a lot worse than that. As far as the church is concerned and as far as the generals are concerned, we just got the support of 250 military leaders and generals, total support. Law enforcement, almost every law enforcement group in the United States. I have Florida, I have Texas, I have Ohio, I have everybody.

Excuse me, Portland, the sheriff just came out today and he said I support President Trump. I don't think you have any law enforcement. You can't even say the word law enforcement because if you say those words, you're going to lose all of your radical left supporters. And why aren't you saying those words, Joe? Why don't you say the words law enforcement?

Because you know what, if they called us in Portland, we would put out that fire in half an hour but they won't do it because they're run by radical left Democrats. If you look at Chicago, if you look at every place you want to look, Seattle. They heard we were coming in the following day and they put up their hands and we got back Seattle. Minneapolis, we got it back, Joe, because we believe in law and order but you don't.

The top ten cities and just about the top 40 cities are run by Democrats and in many cases, radical left, and they've got you wrapped around their finger, Joe, to the point where you don't want to say anything about law and order. I tell you what, the people of this country want and demand law and order and you're afraid to even say it.

WALLACE: All right, I'm going to return to the question of race. Vice President Biden, after the grand jury and the Breonna Taylor case decided not to charge any of the police with homicide, you said it raises the question, quote "whether justice could be equally applied in America." do you believe that there is a separate but unequal system of justice for blacks in this country?

BIDEN: Yes, there is. There is a systemic injustice in this country; in education, and work and -- and -- and in law enforcement and the way in which it's enforced. But look, the vast majority of police officers are good, decent, honorable men and women.

The risk their lives every day to take care of us, but there are some bad apples and when they occur, when they find them, they have to be sorted out. They have to be held accountable. They have to be held accountable. And what I'm going to do as president of the United States is call a -- together an entire group of people at the White House, everything from the civil rights groups to the police officers, the police chiefs and we're going to work this out.

We're going to work this out so we change the way in which we have more transparency and when these things happen. These cops aren't happy to see what happened to-- to -- to George Floyd. These cops aren't happy to see what happened to Breonna Taylor. Most don't like it, but we have to have a system where people are held accountable. And by the way, violence and response is never appropriate. Never appropriate. Peaceful protest is. Violence is never appropriate.

TRUMP: What is peaceful protest? When they run through the middle of the town...

WALLACE: President Trump?

TRUMP: ...and burn down your stores...

WALLACE: President Trump, I...

TRUMP: ...and kill people all over the place?

BIDEN: That is not peaceful protest...

WALLACE: President Trump, I'm not asking...

TRUMP: But you say it is.

WALLACE: President Trump, I'd like to continue to the issue of race and I promise we will get to the issue of law and order in a moment.

TRUMP: Please. All right.

WALLACE: This month, your administration directed federal agencies to end racial sensitivity training that addresses white privilege or critical race theory.

WALLACE: Why did you decide to do that, to end racial sensitivity training?

And do you believe that there is systemic racism in this country, sir?

TRUMP: I ended it because it's racist. I ended it because a lot of people were complaining that they were asked to do things that were absolutely insane, that it was a radical revolution that was taking place in our military, in our schools, all over the place. And you know it and so does everybody else.

WALLACE: What is radical...

TRUMP: And he would know...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: ... totally racist.

WALLACE: What is radical about racial sensitivity training, sir?

TRUMP: If you were a certain person, you had no status in life. It was, sort of, a reversal. And if you look at the people, we were paying people hundreds of thousands of dollars to teach very bad ideas and, frankly, very sick ideas. And, really, they were teaching people to hate our country.

And I'm not going to do that. I'm not going to allow that to happen. We have to go back to the core values of this country. They were teaching people that our country is a horrible place; it's a racist place. And they were teaching people to hate our country. And I'm...

BIDEN: No one...

TRUMP: ... not going to allow that to happen.

WALLACE: Vice President Biden?

BIDEN: Nobody's doing that. He's just -- he's the racist.

TRUMP: Oh, you -- you just don't...

BIDEN: Here's the deal.

TRUMP: ... know.

BIDEN: I know a lot more about this than you.

TRUMP: You don't know this.

WALLACE: Let him finish.

BIDEN: The fact is that there is racial insensitivity. People have to be made aware of what other people feel like, what -- what insults them, what is demeaning to them. It's important that people know. They don't want to -- many people don't want to hurt other people's feelings. But it's -- it makes a big difference. It makes a gigantic difference in the way a child is able to grow up and have a sense of self-esteem.

It's a little bit like how this guy and his friends looked down on so many people. They looked down their nose on people like Irish Catholics like me who grew up in Scranton. They looked down on people who don't have money. They looked down on people who are of a different faith. They looked down on people who are a different color. In fact, we're all Americans. The only way we're going to bring this country together is bring everybody together. There's nothing we cannot do if we do it together. We can take this on and we can defeat racism in America.

WALLACE: Vice President -- I mean, President Trump, sir?

TRUMP: During the Obama-Biden administration, there was tremendous division. There was hatred. You look at Ferguson. You look at -- you go to very -- many places. Look at Oakland. Look what happened in Oakland. Look what happened in Baltimore. Look what happened -- frankly, it was more violent than what I'm even seeing now.

BIDEN: Oh, my Lord.

TRUMP: But the reason...

BIDEN: This is ridiculous...

TRUMP: ... is that the Democrats that run the cities...

BIDEN: ... absolutely ridiculous.

TRUMP: ... don't want to talk, like you, about law and order.

BIDEN: Violent crime -- violent crime...

TRUMP: And you still haven't mentioned -- are you in favor of law and order?

BIDEN: I am in favor of law, you following it, and...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Are you in favor of law and order...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: You asked a question. Let him finish.

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: Law and order...

WALLACE: Let him...

BIDEN: Law and order with justice, where people get treated fairly.

TRUMP: OK.

BIDEN: And the fact of the matter is violent crime went down 17 percent, 15 percent, in our administration.

WALLACE: All right.

BIDEN: It's gone up on his watch.

TRUMP: It went down much more in ours.

BIDEN: He had -- he...

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: ... the United States of America.

WALLACE: Mr. President...

TRUMP: ... every record in the book.

WALLACE: Mr. President, you're going to be very happy because...

TRUMP: Excuse me...

WALLACE: ... we're now going to talk about law and order.

TRUMP: The places we had trouble were Democratic-run cities.

WALLACE: That's exactly my question.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: There has been a dramatic increase in homicides in America this summer particularly. And you often blame that on Democratic mayors and Democratic governors. But in fact, there have been equivalent spikes in Republican-led cities like Tulsa and Fort Worth.

So the question is, is this really a party issue?

TRUMP: I think it's a party issue. You can bring in a couple of examples, but if you look at Chicago, what's going on in Chicago, where 53 people were shot and eight died -- shot; if you look at New York, where it's going up like nobody has ever seen anything. The numbers are going up 100 percent, 150 percent, 200 percent, crime.

BIDEN: Republican cities...

TRUMP: It is crazy what's going on. And he doesn't want to say law and order because he can't, because he'll lose his radical Left supporters, and once he does that, it's over with.

But if he ever got to run this country and they ran it the way he would want to run it, we would have...

BIDEN: No way.

TRUMP: Our suburbs would be gone.

BIDEN: Suburbs?

TRUMP: Our suburbs would be gone. And you would see problems like you've never seen.

BIDEN: He wouldn't know a suburb unless he took a wrong turn.

TRUMP: Oh, I know suburbs.

BIDEN: He would not -- I was raised...

WALLACE: Go ahead -- wait a minute...

BIDEN: I was raised in the suburbs. This is not 1950. All these dog whistles and racism don't work anymore. Suburbs are by and large integrated. There are as many people today driving their kids to soccer practice and/or to -- black and white and Hispanic in the same car as there have been at any time in the past.

What's -- what really is a threat to the suburbs and their safety is his failure to deal with COVID -- they're dying in the suburbs; his failure to deal with the environment. They're being flooded. They're being burned out because his refusal to do anything. That's why the suburbs are in trouble.

WALLACE: I do want to talk about this issue of law and order, though. And in the joint recommendation that came from the Biden-Bernie Sanders task force, you talked about, quote, "re-imagining policing." First of all, what does reimagining policing mean? And do you support --

BIDEN: It means --

WALLACE: Let me, if I might finish the question. What does reimagining policing mean and do you support the Black Lives Matter call for community control of policing?

BIDEN: Look, what I support is the police having the opportunity to deal with the problems they face. And I'm -- I'm totally opposed to defunding the police offices. As a matter of fact, police -- the local police, the only one defunding in his budget calls for a $400 million cut in local law enforcement assistance.

They need more assistance. They need, when they show up for a 911 call, to have someone with them as a psychologist or a psychiatrist to keep them from having to use force and be able to talk people down.

We have to have community policing like we had before, where the officers get to know the people in the communities. That's when crime went down. It didn't go up, it went down. And so, we have to be engaged --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: That's not what they're talking about, Chris. That's not what --

BIDEN: That's what -- that's exactly --

TRUMP: He's talking about defunding the police.

BIDEN: That -- that is not true.

TRUMP: He doesn't have any law support --

BIDEN: Would (ph) you -- look --

TRUMP: He has no law enforcement support, almost nothing.

BIDEN: That's not -- look --

TRUMP: Oh really? Why do you have? Name one group that supports you. Name one group that came out and supported you.

BIDEN: Look --

TRUMP: Go ahead --

BIDEN: Look --

TRUMP: -- think. We have time.

BIDEN: We don't have time to do anything except --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: No, no, think about it.

WALLACE: All right --

BIDEN: All right, folks --

TRUMP: Name one law enforcement group --

BIDEN: Folks --

TRUMP: -- that came out and supported you, Joe.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: I think -- I think -- gentlemen, I think I'm going to -- I'm going to take back the moderator's role --

TRUMP: There aren't -- I don't think there are any.

WALLACE: -- and I want -- and I want to get to another subject, which is the issue of protests in many cities that have turned violent. In Portland, Oregon, especially, we had more than 100 straight days of protests -- which I think you would agree, you talk about peaceful protests -- many of those turned into riots.

Mr. Vice President, you say that people who commit crimes should be held accountable. The question I have though is, as the Democratic nominee -- and earlier tonight you said that you are the Democratic Party night now -- have you ever called the Democratic mayor of Portland or the Democratic governor of Oregon and said, hey, you've got to stop this. Bring in the National Guard, do whatever it takes. But you'd stop the days and months of violence in Portland.

BIDEN: I don't hold public office now. I am a former vice president. I've made it clear. I've made it clear in my public statements that the violence should be prosecuted. It should be prosecuted and anyone who commits it should be prosecuted --

WALLACE: But you've never called for the people --

TRUMP: He's not about (ph) that --

WALLACE: -- the leader -- excuse me, sir. You have never called for the leaders in Portland and in Oregon to call and bring in the National Guard and knock off 100 days of riots?

BIDEN: Because they can, in fact, take care of it if he'd just stay out of the way --

TRUMP: Oh -- oh really?

BIDEN: Look, here --

TRUMP: Oh really?

BIDEN: Here's the thing --

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Well, sir -- but I asked him a question --

TRUMP: I sent in the U.S. Marshals to get the killer of the young man in the middle of the street. They shot him. And for three days --

WALLACE: President Trump --

TRUMP: -- Portland wouldn't do anything.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: -- I have to interrupt -- President Trump --

TRUMP: I had to send in the U.S. Marshals, they took care of business.

WALLACE: Go ahead, sir.

BIDEN: And -- and by the way, his own former spokesperson said riots and chaos and violence help his cause. That's what this is all about.

TRUMP: I don't know who said that.

BIDEN: I do.

TRUMP: Who? Who?

BIDEN: I think Kellyanne Conway.

TRUMP: I don't think she said that.

BIDEN: She said that.

TRUMP: I don't --

BIDEN: And so here's the --

WALLACE: All right.

BIDEN: Well, here's the point.

WALLACE: Go ahead, sir.

BIDEN: The point is that's why just keeps trying to rile everything up. He doesn't want to calm things down. Instead of going in and talking to people and saying let's get everybody together, figure out how to deal with this, what's he do, he just pours gasoline in the fire constantly every single solitary time --

WALLACE: OK. And -- and to end this -- button up this segment, I'm going to give you a minute to answer, sir. You have repeatedly criticized --

TRUMP: Well, wait a minute. I have to answer his statement -- his statement --

WALLACE: You have repeatedly --

TRUMP: Wait, just one second.

WALLACE: You have -- no, you've been talking back and forth.

TRUMP: He made a statement.

WALLACE: I'm asking you --

TRUMP: I would love to end it.

WALLACE: You know, sir -- you know, if you want to switch seats we could --

TRUMP: We could very quickly --

WALLACE: -- we could do that. But I'm --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Send in the National Guard, it would be over. There'd be no problem.

WALLACE: OK, good.

TRUMP: But they don't want to accept the National Guard.

WALLACE: You have repeatedly criticized the vice president for not specifically calling out Antifa and other left-wing extremist groups --

TRUMP: That's right.

WALLACE: But are you willing tonight to condemn white supremacists and militia groups --

TRUMP: Sure.

WALLACE: -- and to say that they need to stand down and not add to the violence in a number of these cities, as we saw in Kenosha and as we've seen in Portland?

TRUMP: Sure, I'm willing to do that but --

WALLACE: Are you prepared to specifically --

BIDEN: Then do it.

WALLACE: Well, go ahead, sir.

TRUMP: I would say -- I would say almost everything I see is from the left wing, not from the right wing.

WALLACE: So what are you -- what are you --

TRUMP: If you look --

WALLACE: What are you saying?

TRUMP: I'm -- I'm willing to do anything. I want to see peace.

WALLACE: Well, then do it, sir.

BIDEN: Say it. Do it. Say it.

TRUMP: Do you want to call them -- what do you want to call them? Give me a name. Give me a name, go ahead.

WALLACE: White supremacists and --

BIDEN: White supremacists --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Well, who would like me condemn?

WALLACE: White supremacists (ph) and right (ph) --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Who?

WALLACE: -- militia.

TRUMP: Proud Boys, stand by and stand by. But I'll tell you what -- I'll tell you what, somebody's got to do something about Antifa and the left because this is not a right-wing problem.

BIDEN: His own --

TRUMP: This is a left wing --

BIDEN: His own - his own FBI Director said (inaudible) -

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: -- a left-wing - this is a left-wing problem.

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: -- threat (inaudible) White Supremacist.

WALLACE: Go ahead. Go ahead, sir.

BIDEN: ANTIFA'S an idea, not an organization.

TRUMP: Oh, you got to be kidding me.

BIDEN: Not malicious.

TRUMP: Oh really?

BIDEN: That's what his FBI -

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: OK.

BIDEN: -- his FBI Director said.

WALLACE: Gentlemen, we're going to -

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Well then, you know what? He's wrong.

WALLACE: No, no. We're done. We're done, sir. We're moving on to the next - we're moving -

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: Everybody (inaudible) advice in your administration -

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: When a bat hits you over the head (ph), that's not an idea. ANTIFA is bad.

BIDEN: Everybody in your administration tells you the truth is a bad idea.

TRUMP: Can I tell you what?

BIDEN: You have no ideas that are -

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: ANTIFA is a dangerous, radical group.

WALLACE: All right, gentlemen, we're not moving onto the Trump and Biden records.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: -- and you ought to be careful with them. They'll overthrow you in a few seconds (ph).

WALLACE: When a president - I'm going to ask a question.

(LAUGHTER)

When the president seeks a second term, it is generally a referendum on his record, but Vice President Biden, you like to quote one of your dad's sayings, which is don't compare me to the almighty. Compare me to the alternative. And in this case, sir, you are the alternative. Looking at both of your records, I'm going to ask each of you why should voters elect you president over your opponent? In this segment, President Trump, you go first. Two minutes.

TRUMP: Because there has never been an administration or president who has done more than I've done in a period of three and a half years, and that's despite the impeachment hoax, and you saw what happened today with Hillary Clinton where it was a whole, big con job. But despite going through all of these things where I had to fight both flanks and behind me and above there has never been an administration that's done what I've done. The greatest before COVID came in, the greatest economy in history, lowest unemployment numbers. Everything was good. Everything was going. And by the way there was unity going to happen. People were calling me. For the first time in years they were calling, and they were saying it's time maybe. And then what happened? We got hit, but now we're building it back up again. A rebuilding of the military, including Space Force and all of the other things, a fixing of the VA, which was a mess under him. 308,000 people died because they didn't have proper healthcare. It was a mess.

BIDEN: So wrong (ph).

TRUMP: And we now got a 91 percent approval rating at the VA. Our vets - we take care of our vets, but we've rebuilt our military. The job that we've done - and I'll tell you something. Some people say maybe the most important. By the end of the first term I'll have approximately 300 federal judges and court of appeals judges, 300, and hopefully three great Supreme Court judges - justices. That is a record the likes of which very few people - and you know one of the reasons I'll have so many judges? Because President Obama and him left me 128 judges to fill. When you leave office, you don't leave any judges. That's like you just don't do that. They left 128 openings, and if I were a member of his party, because they have a little different philosophy, I'd say if you left us 128 openings you can't be a good president, you can't be a good vice president. But I want thank you because it gives us almost - it'll probably be above that number. By the end of this term -

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Time, sir.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: -- 300 judges. It's a record.

WALLACE: Looking at both your records, why should voters elect you president as opposed to president Trump?

BIDEN: Under this president -

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: You have two minutes uninterrupted.

BIDEN: Under this president, we've become weaker, sicker, poorer, more divided, and more violent. When I was vice president, we inherited a recession. I was asked to fix it. I did. We left him a booming economy, and he caused a recession. With regard to being weaker, the fact is that I've gone head-to-head with Putin and made it clear to him we're not going to take any of his stuff. He's Putin's puppy. He still refuses to even say anything Putin about the bounty on the heads of American soldiers.

TRUMP: Your son got $3.5 million.

WALLACE: No, no, no.

BIDEN: (inaudible) OK, and by the way, my son -

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: (inaudible)

WALLACE: Mr. President. No, wait a minute. Mr. President, your campaign agreed to both side would get two-minute answers uninterrupted. Well, your side agreed to it, and why don't you observe what your campaign agreed to as a ground rule. OK, sir?

BIDEN: He never keeps his word. You can add back -

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: (inaudible).

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: No, no, no. I'm not asking.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: (inaudible). That's all.

WALLACE: That was a rhetorical question. Go ahead, sir.

BIDEN: Can you add back 30 seconds?

WALLACE: Yes, yes. You may have -

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: All right.

WALLACE: Go ahead.

BIDEN: So thirdly, we're poorer. The billionaires have gotten much more wealthy by a tune of over $300 billion to $400 billion more just since COVID. You in the home, you got less. You're in more trouble that you were before. In terms of being more violent, when we were in office there were 15 percent less violence in America than there is today. He's president of the United States. It's on his watch. And with regard to more divided, the nation can't stay divided. We can't be this way.

And speaking of my son, the way you talk about the military, the way you talk about them being losers and being - and just being suckers, my son was in Iraq. He spent a year there. He got the - he got the Bronze Star. He got the Conspicuous Service Medal. He was not a loser. He was a patriot and the people left behind there were heroes.

TRUMP: Oh really. Really?

BIDEN: And I resent like hell ...

TRUMP: Are you talking about Hunter?

BIDEN: I'm talking of my son Bo Biden, you're talking about ...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: I don't know -- I don't know Bo, I know Hunter. Hunter got thrown -- Hunter got thrown out of the military. He was thrown out, dishonorably discharged for cocaine use.

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: That's not true, he wasn't dishonorably ...

TRUMP: And he didn't have a job until you became vice president. And once you became vice president ...

BIDEN: None of that is true.

TRUMP: ... he made a fortune in Ukraine, in China, in Moscow, and various other places.

BIDEN: That is simply not true.

TRUMP: He made a fortune.

BIDEN: My son -- my son ...

WALLACE: Gentlemen ...

TRUMP: And he didn't have a job.

BIDEN: My son, like a lot of people -- like a lot of people we know at home had a drug problem. He's over taken it. He's -- he's fixed it -- he's worked on it and I'm proud of him. I'm proud of my son.

TRUMP: By why was he given tens of millions of dollars.

BIDEN: But he wasn't given tens of millions of -- that is totally ...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: He was given tens of millions of dollars.

BIDEN: That is totally -- that's a totally ...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: President Trump, you've already -- but we've already -- we've already ...

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: ... totally discredited.

WALLACE: We've -- we've already been through this. I think the American people would rather here about more substantial subjects.

TRUMP: So do I.

WALLACE: Well, you know, as the moderator, sir, I'm going to make a judgment call here ...

TRUMP: I know but when somebody gets $3.5 million from the mayor of Moscow, I think it's a terrible thing.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: OK. Right. Let's talk about -- let's about ...

BIDEN: That is not true. That report is totally discredited.

TRUMP: Why did he get it?

WALLACE: I -- I -- I think ...

BIDEN: Mitt Romney on that committee said it wasn't worth tax payers' money. That report is written for political reason.

WALLACE: You know, I'd like to talk about climate change.

BIDEN: So would I.

WALLACE: OK. The forest fires in the west are raging now. They have burned millions of acres. They have displaced hundreds of thousands of people. When state officials there blame the fires on climate change, Mr. President, you said I don't think the science knows.

Over your four years you have pulled the U.S. out of the Paris Climate Accord. You have rolled back a number of Obama environmental records. What do you believe about the science of climate change and what will you do in the next four years to confront it?

TRUMP: I want crystal clean water and air. I want beautiful clean air. We have now the lowest carbon. If you look at our numbers right now, we are doing phenomenally. But I haven't destroyed our businesses. Our businesses aren't put out of commission.

If you look at the Paris Accord, it was a disaster from our stand point. And people are actually very happy about what's going on because our businesses are doing well. As far as the fires are concerned, you need forest management. In addition to everything else; the forest floors are loaded up with trees, dead trees that are years old and they're like leaves and everything else.

You drop a cigarette in there, the whole forest burns down. You've got to have forest management, you've got to have cuts ...

WALLACE: What do you believe -- what do you believe about the science of climate change, sir?

TRUMP: I believe that we have to do everything we can to have immaculate air, immaculate water and do whatever else we can that's good. You know we're planting a billion trees, the Billion Tree Project. And it's very exciting for a lot of people.

WALLACE: Do you believe that -- that human pollution -- gas -- greenhouse gas emissions contributes to the global warming of the planet?

TRUMP: I think a lot of things do but I think to an extent yes -- I think to an extent yes. But I also think we have to do better management of our forest. Every year I get the call California is burning. California is burning. If that was cleaned -- if that were -- if you have forest management, good forest management, you wouldn't be getting those calls.

You know in Europe they live -- they have forest cities -- they're called forest cities. They maintain their forest, they manage their forest. I was with the head of major country. It's a forest city.

He said, sir, we have trees that are far more -- they -- they ignite much easier than California. There shouldn't be that problem. I spoke with the governor about it. I'm getting along very well with the governor. But I said, you know, at some point you can't every year have hundreds of thousands of acres of land just burn to the ground. That's burning down because of a lack of management.

WALLACE: But sir, if you believe in the science of climate change, why have you rolled back the Obama clean power plan, which limited carbon emissions in power plants. Why have you relaxed ...

TRUMP: Because it was driving energy prices through the sky ...

WALLACE: Why have you relaxed fuel economy standards that are going to create more pollution form cars and trucks?

TRUMP: Well, not really because what's happening is the car is much less expensive and it's a much safer car and you're talking about a tiny difference. And then what would happen because of the cost of the car, you would have at least double and triple the number of cars purchased.

We have the old slugs out there that are 10, 12 years old. If you did that, the car would be safer, it would be much cheaper by ...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: But in the case of California, they've simply ignored ...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: No, but you would take a lot of cars off the market because people would be able to afford a car. Now -- so -- and by the way, we're going to see how that turns out but a lot of people agree with me, many people. The care has gotten so expensive because they have computers all over the place for an extra little bit of gasoline.

WALLACE: OK.

TRUMP: And by the -- and -- and -- and I'm OK with electric cars too. I think -- I'm all for electric cars. I've given big incentives for electric cars.

But what they've done in California is just crazy.

WALLACE: All right.

Vice President, I'd like to respond to the president's climate change record. But I also want to ask you about a concern. You proposed $2 trillion in green jobs.

You talk about new limits. Not abolishing. But new limits on fracking, ending the use of fossil fuels to generate electricity by 2035, and zero net emission of greenhouse gases by 2050. The president says a lot of these things would tank the economy and cost millions of jobs.

BIDEN: He's absolutely wrong, number one.

Number two, if in fact when -- when our -- during our administration, the Recovery Act, I was able to -- I was in charge -- able to bring down the cost of renewable energy to cheaper than or as cheap as coal and gas and oil. Nobody is going to build another coal fired plant in America. No one is going to build another oil fire plant in America. They're going to move to renewable energy -- number one.

Number two, we're going to make sure that we are able to take the federal fleet and turn it into a fleet that's run on their electric vehicles. Making sure that we can do that, we're going to put 500,000 charging stations in all of the highways that we're going to be building in the future.

We're going to build an economy that, in fact, is going to provide for the ability, us (ph), to take 4 million buildings and make sure that they, in fact, are weatherized in a way that, in fact, they'll -- they'll emit significantly less gas and oil because the heat will not be going out.

There are so many things that we can do now to create thousands and thousands of jobs. We can get to net zero in terms of energy production by 2035. Not only not costing people jobs, creating jobs, creating millions of good paying jobs. Not 15 bucks an hour, but prevailing wage, by having a new infrastructure that, in fact, is green.

And the first thing I will do, I will rejoin the Paris Accord. I will join the Paris Accord because with us out of it, look what's happening. It's all falling apart.

And talk about someone who has no -- no relationship to -- with foreign policy. Brazil, the rainforest in Brazil are being torn down, are being ripped down. More -- more carbon is absorbed in that rainforest than every bit of carbon that's emitted in the United States.

Instead of doing something about that, I would be gathering up and making sure we had the countries of the world coming up with $20 billion and say, here's $20 billion, stop -- stop tearing down the forest. And if you don't, then you're going to have significant economic consequences or consequence (ph).

WALLACE: What about -- what about the argument that President Trump basically says that you have to balance environmental interest and economic interest and he's drawn his line?

BIDEN: Well, he hasn't drawn a line. He still, for example, makes sure that we -- he wants to make sure that methane is not a problem. We can -- you can now emit more methane without it being a problem. Methane.

TRUMP: Not true.

BIDEN: This is a guy who says that you don't have to have mileage standards for automobiles that exist now. This is a guy who says that --

TRUMP: Not true, not true.

BIDEN: It's all true. And here's the deal --

TRUMP: You're talking about the Green New Deal. And it's not $2 billion, or $20 billion as you said.

BIDEN: I'm --

TRUMP: It's $100 trillion.

BIDEN: I'm talking about the climate --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Where they want to rip down buildings --

WALLACE: Go for a minute and then we can go.

TRUMP: -- and rebuild the buildings.

BIDEN: No, that is not --

TRUMP: It's the dumbest, most ridiculous --

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: -- that is not --

TRUMP: -- where airplanes are out of business.

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: That's (ph)--

TRUMP: Where two car systems are out.

BIDEN: Not true.

TRUMP: Where they want to take out the cows, too.

BIDEN: Not true.

TRUMP: You know, that's not true either, right?

BIDEN: Not true.

TRUMP: This is a -- this is a $100 trillion. That's more money than our country could make in 100 years if we're going to --

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: That's simply not the case. It's not the --

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: All right. Let me -- let me --

TRUMP: It will destroy our country.

WALLACE: Because I actually -- wait a minute, sir. I actually have studied your plan. And it includes upgrading 4 million buildings.

BIDEN: Yes.

WALLACE: Weatherizing 2 million homes over four years. Building one and a half million energy efficient homes.

So, the question becomes, some -- the president is saying, I think some people who support the president would say, that sounds like it's going to cost a lot of money and hurt the economy.

BIDEN: What it's going to do, it's going to create thousands and millions of jobs. Good paying jobs.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: A hundred trillions dollars.

WALLACE: Let him finish, sir.

BIDEN: He doesn't know how to do that. They --

TRUMP: A hundred trillion dollars.

BIDEN: The fact is, it's going to create millions of good-paying jobs and these tax incentives to people -- for people to weatherize, which he wants to get -- get rid of. It's going to make the economy much safer.

Look how much we're paying now to deal with the hurricanes, with -- to deal with -- by the way, he has an answer for hurricanes. He said maybe we should drop a nuclear weapon on them. They may (ph) --

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: I never said that at all.

BIDEN: Actually, you did say it.

TRUMP: You made it up.

BIDEN: And here's the deal.

TRUMP: You make up a lot of things.

BIDEN: We're going to be in a position where we can create hard, hard, good jobs by making sure the environment is clean and we all are in better shape. We spent billions of dollars now, billions of dollars on floods, hurricanes, rising seas. We're in real trouble.

Look at what has happened just in the Midwest with these storms that come through and wipe out entire sections and counties in Iowa. That didn't happen before. They are because of global warming. We make up 15 percent of the world's problem. We, in fact -- but the rest of the world, we've got to get them to come along. That is why we've got to get back into, back into the Paris Accord.

WALLACE: All right, gentlemen, we...

TRUMP: Wait a minute, Chris, so why didn't he do it for 47 years? You were vice president, why didn't you get the world -- China sends up real dirt into the air. Russia does, India does, they all do. We're supposed to be good. And by the way, he made a couple of statements. The Green New Deal is $100 trillion...

BIDEN: That is not my plan. The Green New Deal is not my plan.

TRUMP: Well, you want to rebuild every building.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Gentlemen...

TRUMP: He made a statement about the military. He said I said something about the military. He and his friends made it up and then they went with it. I never said it.

WALLACE: OK.

BIDEN: That is not true.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Mr. Vice President...

TRUMP: He called the military stupid bastards.

BIDEN: I did not say that.

WALLACE: Mr. Vice President...

TRUMP: He said, stupid bastards.

WALLACE: Stop.

TRUMP: I would never say that to the military.

BIDEN: Play it.

WALLACE: Go ahead, Mr. Vice President, answer his final question.

BIDEN: The final question is, I can't remember which in all his ranting.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: I'm having a little trouble myself. But -- and about the economy and about this question of what it's going to cost?

BIDEN: The economy...

WALLACE: I mean, the Green New Deal and the idea of what your environmental change will do.

BIDEN: The Green New Deal will pay for itself as we move forward. We are not going to build plants that, in fact, are great polluting plants. We're going to build...

WALLACE: Do you support the Green New Deal?

BIDEN: Pardon me?

WALLACE: Do you support the Green New Deal?

BIDEN: No, I don't support the Green New Deal.

TRUMP: Oh, you don't? Oh, that is a big statement.

(CROSSTALK)

BIDEN: I support the Biden plan that I put forward.

WALLACE: OK.

BIDEN: The Biden plan, which is different than what he calls the radical Green New Deal.

WALLACE: All right. Gentlemen, final segment, election integrity. As we meet tonight, millions of Americans are receiving mail-in ballots or going to vote early. How confident should we be that this will be a fair election? And what are you prepared to do over the next five-plus weeks, because it will not only be to Election Day, but also counting some ballots, mail-in ballots after Election Day, what are you prepared to do to reassure the American people that the next president will be the legitimate winner of this election?

In this final segment, Mr. Vice President, you go first.

BIDEN: I'm prepared to let people vote. They should go to iwillvote.com. Decide how they're going to vote, when they're going to vote, and what means by which they are going to vote. His own homeland security director as well as the FBI director says there is no evidence at all that mail-in ballots are a source of being manipulated and cheating. They said that.

The fact is that there are going to be millions of people because of COVID that are going to be voting by mail-in ballots, like he does, by the way. He sits behind the Resolute Desk and sends his ballot to Florida, number one.

Number two, we are going to make sure that those people who want to vote in person are able to vote because enough poll watchers are there to make sure they can socially distance, the polls are open on time, and that polls stay open until the votes are counted. And this is all about trying to dissuade people from voting because he's trying to scare people into thinking that it's not going to be legitimate.

Show up and vote. You will determine the outcome of this election. Vote, vote, vote. If you're able to vote early in your state, vote early. If you're able to vote in person, vote in person. Vote whatever way is the best way for you because you will -- he cannot stop you from being able to determine the outcome of this election.

And in terms of whether or not when the votes are counted and they are all counted, that will be accepted. If I win, that will be accepted. If I lose, that will be accepted. But, by the way, if, in fact, he says he's not sure what he's going to accept, well, let me tell you something, it doesn't matter because if we get the votes come it's going to be all over. He's going to go. He can't stay in power. It won't happen. It won't happen.

So vote. Just make sure you understand, you have it in your control to determine what this country is going to look like the next four years. Is it going to change, or are you going to get four more years of these lies?

WALLACE: Mr. President, two minutes.

TRUMP: So, when I listen to Joe talking about a transition, there has been no transition from when I won. I won that election and if you look at "crooked" Hillary Clinton, if you look at all of the different people, there was no transition because they came after me trying to do a coup, they came after me spying on my campaign. They started from the day I won and even before I won, from the day I came down the escalator with our first lady.

They were a disaster. They were a disgrace to our country. And we've caught them. We've caught them all. We've got it all on tape. We've caught them all. And, by the way, you gave the idea for the Logan Act against General Flynn. You had better take a look at that because we caught you, in a sense, and President Obama was sitting in the office. He knew it too so don't tell me about a free transition. As far as the ballots are concerned, it's a disaster. A solicited ballot, OK, solicited is OK. You're soliciting, you're asking, they send it back, you send it back. I did that. If you have an unsolicited -- they're sending millions of ballots all over the country.

There is fraud, they found them in creeks, they found some with the name Trump, just happened to have the name Trump just the other day in a wastepaper basket. They're being sent all over the place. They sent a two and a Democrat area, they sent out 1,000 ballots. Everybody got two ballots. This is going to be a fraud like you've never seen.

The other thing, it's a nice a nice come on November 3rd, you're watching and you see who won the election and I think we are going to do well because people are really happy with the job we've done. But you know what, we won't know -- we might not know for months because these ballots are going to be all over. Take a look at what happened in Manhattan. Take a look at what happened in New Jersey.

Take a look at what happened in Virginia and other places. They are not losing 2 percent, 1 percent, which by the way is too much. An election can be won or lost by that. They are losing 30 percent, 40 percent. It's a fraud and it's a shame. And can you imagine, they say you have to have your ballot in by November 10th. November 10th. That means that's seven days after the election. In theory, should have been announced

WALLACE: OK, sir...

TRUMP: We have major states with that, all run by Democrats.

WALLACE: Two minutes is two minutes.

TRUMP: All run by Democrats...

WALLACE : President Trump, you're going to be able to continue. You have been charging for months that mail-in voting is going to be a disaster. You say it's rigged. You said it's going to lead to fraud. But in 2018, in the last midterm election, 31 million people voted mail-in voting. That was a quarter, more than a quarter of all the voters that either cast their ballots by mail. Now that millions of mail-in ballots have gone out, what are you going to do about it, and are you counting on the Supreme Court, including a Justice Barrett, to settle any disputes?

TRUMP: I think I'm counting at them to look at the ballots, definitely. I don't think -- I hope we don't need them, in terms of the election itself, but for the ballots, I think so. Because what's happening is incredible. I just heard -- I read today where at least 1 percent of the ballots for 2016 were invalidated. They take them. We don't like them, we don't like them.

WALLACE: What are you going to do about it? There are millions of ballots going out right now.

TRUMP: What you do is you go and vote. You do a solicited ballot and that's OK...

WALLACE: No, no. I'm not talking...

TRUMP: Or you go and vote.

WALLACE: Now, I'm asking you about the fact that millions of people...

TRUMP: You go and vote. You go and vote like they used it when the old days...

WALLACE: But what I'm saying is, what do you do about the fact that millions of people...

TRUMP: You either do, Chris, a solicited ballot where you're sending it in, sending it back and they are saying -- they have mailmen with lots -- did you see what's going on? Take a look at West Virginia, mailmen selling the ballots. They are being sold. They are being dumped in rivers. This is a horrible thing for our country.

BIDEN: There is no -- there is no evidence of that.

TRUMP: This is not going to end well.

BIDEN: There is no evidence of that.

WALLACE: Vice President Biden...

BIDEN: Five states have had mail-in ballots for the last decade or more, five including two Republican states. You don't have to solicit the ballot, it's sent to you, it's sent to your home. What we're saying is, they're saying it has to be postmarked by the time -- by Election Day. If it doesn't get in until the seventh, eighth, ninth, it still should be counted. He's just afraid of counting the votes because...

TRUMP: You're wrong, you're wrong.

WALLACE: I want to continue with you on this, Vice President Biden.

TRUMP: Chris, he's so wrong when he makes a statement like that.

WALLACE: No, excuse me. Vice President Biden, the biggest problem in fact over the years with mail-in voting has not been fraud, historically. It has been that sizable numbers, sometimes hundreds of thousands of ballots are thrown out because they have not been properly filled out, or there is some other irregularity where they missed the deadline. So the question I have come are you concerned that the Supreme Court, with a Justice Barrett, will settle any dispute?

BIDEN: I'm concerned that any court will settle this because here's the deal, when you -- when you file -- when you get a ballot and you fill it out, you're supposed to have an affidavit. If you didn't know, you have someone say that this is me. You should be able to come if, in fact, you can verify that's you before the ballot is thrown out, that's sufficient to be able to count the ballot because someone made a mistake and not doubting the correct I. Who they voted for, testify, said who they voted for, say it's you, that is totally legitimate.

WALLACE: All right...

TRUMP: Excuse me, when you have an 80 million ballot...

WALLACE: No, no, no. I have a final -- gentlemen have a final question...

TRUMP: ...sent in a swamping (ph) system -- you know it can't be done. You know what can't, and already..

BIDEN: (Inaudible) mail serves...

WALLACE: All right, so now -- the final -- wait a minute. Gentlemen, final question...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: We can keep talking. In eight states, election workers are prohibited currently by law, eight states, from even beginning to process ballots, even take them out of the envelopes...

BIDEN: Yes.

WALLACE: ... and flatten them, until Election Day.

That means that it's likely, because there's going to be a huge increase in mail-in balloting, that we are not going to know on election night who the winner is, that it could be days; it could be weeks...

TRUMP: It could be months.

WALLACE: ... until we find out who the -- the new president is.

So I -- first for you, sir, finally for the -- for the vice president. I hope neither of you will interrupt the other. Will you urge your supporters to stay calm during this extended period, not to engage in any civil unrest?

And will you pledge tonight that you will not declare victory until the election has been independently certified? President Trump, you go first.

TRUMP: I'm urging my supporters to go into the polls and watch very carefully. Because that's what has to happen. I am urging them to do it.

As you know, today, there was a big problem. In Philadelphia they went in to watch. They were called poll watchers -- a very safe, very nice thing. They were thrown out. They weren't allowed to watch.

You know why? Because bad things happen in Philadelphia, bad things. And I -- I am urging -- I am urging my people. I hope it's going to be a fair election. If it's a fair election...

WALLACE: You're urging them what?

TRUMP: ... I am 100 percent on board. But if I see tens of thousands of ballots being manipulated, I can't go along with that. And I'll tell you what. From a common-sense...

WALLACE: What does that mean, you can't go along? Does that mean you're going to tell your people to take to the streets?

TRUMP: I'll tell you what it means. It means you have a fraudulent election. You're sending out 80 million ballots.

WALLACE: And what are you going to -- and what would you do about that?

TRUMP: They're not -- they're not equipped to -- these people aren't equipped to handle it, number one. Number two...

WALLACE: OK.

TRUMP: ... they cheat. They cheat. Hey, they found ballots in a wastepaper basket three days ago, and they all had the name -- military ballots; they were military. They all had the name Trump on them.

WALLACE: Vice President Biden...

TRUMP: You think that's good?

WALLACE: Vice President Biden, final question for you. Will you urge your supporters to stay calm while the vote is counted?

And will you pledge not to declare victory until the election is independently certified?

BIDEN: Yes. And here's the deal. They count the ballots, as you pointed out. Some of these ballots in some states can't even be opened until Election Day. And if there's thousands of ballots, it's going to take time to do it.

And, by the way, our military, they've been voting by ballots for --since the end of the Civil War, in effect. And that's -- and that's what's going to happen. Why was it not -- why is it for them somehow not fraudulent? It's the same process. It's honest. No one has established at all that there is fraud related to mail-in ballots, that somehow it's a fraudulent process.

TRUMP: It's already been established.

BIDEN: It's...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Take a look at Carolyn Maloney's race...

WALLACE: I asked you. You had an opportunity to respond...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: Go ahead...

TRUMP: They have no idea what happened.

WALLACE: Vice President Biden, go ahead.

BIDEN: He has no idea what he's talking about. Here's the deal. The fact is I will accept it. And he will, too. You know why? Because, once the winner is declared, after all the ballots are counted, all the votes are counted, that will be the end of it. That will be the end of it. And if it's me, in fact, fine. If it's not me, I'll support the outcome.

And I'll be a president not just for the Democrats, I'll be a president for Democrats and Republicans. And this guy...

TRUMP: I want to see an honest ballot...

WALLACE: Gentlemen, you say that's the end of it.

(CROSSTALK)

This is the end of this debate.

TRUMP: I want to see an honest ballot count.

WALLACE: We're going to leave it there.

TRUMP: And I think he does, too.

WALLACE: To be continued...

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: ... as -- in more debates, as we go on.

President Trump, Vice President Biden, it's been an interesting hour and a half.

(LAUGHTER)

I want to thank you both for participating in the first of three debates that you have agreed to engage in.

We want to thank Case Western Reserve University...

BIDEN: Yes.

WALLACE: ... and the Cleveland Clinic for hosting this event.

The next debate, sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates, will be one week from tomorrow, October 7th, at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City. The two vice presidential nominees, Vice President Mike Pence and Senator Kamala Harris will debate at 9 p.m. Eastern that night. We hope you watch.

Until then, thank you, and good night.

(APPLAUSE)

Kristen Welker: (00:18)
Good evening, everyone. Good evening. Thank you so much for being here. It is such an honor for me to moderate this debate tonight, the final debate. I want to welcome the first family and the first lady. Were so glad and thankful that you are feeling better. I want to welcome the Biden family, Dr. Jill Biden. Thank you all for being here tonight. We are so excited. Were looking forward to a really robust discussion. And the only thing I would reiterate are the CPD guidelines that when the candidates are talking, please hold any applause or any other reactions. Except of course, when they walk out, make sure you cheer and loud and applause so that everyone can hear you. Thank you for having me. This is really the honor of a lifetime. I am going to sit down and just get organized and get settled and the show will start very soon. Thank you for being here. (silence). Good evening from Belmont University in Nashville, Tennessee. Im Kristen Welker of NBC News. And I welcome you to the final 2020 presidential debate between President Donald J. Trump and former vice president Joe Biden. Tonights debate is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. It is conducted under health and safety protocols designed by the Commissions health security advisor. The audience here in the hall has promised to remain silent. No cheers, boos, or other interruptions, except right now, as we welcome to the stage, former vice president Joe Biden and President Donald J. Trump.

Donald Trump: (07:37)
How are you doing? How are you?

Kristen Welker: (07:58)
And I do want to say a very good evening to both of you. This debate will cover six major topics. At the beginning of each section, each candidate will have two minutes, uninterrupted, to answer my first question. The Debate Commission will then turn on their microphone only when it is their turn to answer. And the Commission will turn it off exactly when the two minutes have expired. After that, both microphones will remain on. But on behalf of the voters, Im going to ask you to please speak one at a time.

Kristen Welker: (08:27)
The goal is for you to hear each other and for the American people to hear every word of what you both have to say. And so with that, if youre ready, lets start. And we will begin with the fight against the coronavirus. President Trump, the first question is for you. The country is heading into a dangerous new phase. More than 40,000 Americans are in the hospital tonight with COVID, including record numbers here in Tennessee. And since the two of you last shared a stage, 16,000 Americans have died from COVID. So please be specific. How would you lead the country during this next stage of the coronavirus crisis? Two minutes, uninterrupted.

Kristen Welker: (09:03)
 during this next stage of the coronavirus crisis. Two minutes uninterrupted.

Donald Trump: (09:04)
So as you know, 2.2 million people modeled out, were expected to die. We closed up the greatest economy in the world in order to fight this horrible disease that came from China. Its a worldwide pandemic. Its all over the world. You see the spikes in Europe and many other places right now. If you notice, the mortality rate is down 85%. The excess mortality rate is way down and much lower than almost any other country. And were fighting it and were fighting it hard. There is a spike. There was a spike in Florida and its now gone.

Donald Trump: (09:41)
There was a very big spike in Texas. Its now gone. There was a very big spike in Arizona. Its now gone. And there was some spikes and surges and other places, they will soon be gone. We have a vaccine thats coming. Its ready. Its going to be announced within weeks. And its going to be delivered. We have Operation Warp Speed, which is the military is going to distribute the vaccine.

Donald Trump: (10:04)
I can tell you from personal experience, I was in the hospital. I had it and I got better. And I will tell you that I had something that they gave me, a therapeutic, I guess they would call it. Some people could say it was a cure, but I was in for a short period of time. And I got better very fast or I wouldnt be here tonight. And now they say Im immune. Whether its four months or a lifetime, nobodys been able to say that, but Im immune. More and more people are getting better. We have a problem thats a worldwide problem. This is a worldwide problem, but Ive been congratulated by the heads of many countries on what weve been able to do. If you take a look at what weve done in terms of goggles and masks and gowns and everything else, and in particular ventilators were now making ventilators all over the world, thousands and thousands a month distributing them all over the world. It will go away. And as I say, were rounding the turn. Were rounding the corner. Its going away.

Kristen Welker: (11:06)
Okay. Former Vice President Biden to you. How would you lead the country out of this crisis? You have two minutes uninterrupted.

Joe Biden: (11:13)
220,000 Americans dead. You hear nothing else I say tonight, hear this. Anyone who is responsible for not taking control. In fact, not saying I take no responsibility initially. Anyone is responsible for that many deaths should not remain as president of the United States of America. Were in a situation where there are a thousand deaths a day now. A thousand deaths a day. And there are over 70,000 new cases per day. Compared to whats going on in Europe as the New England Medical Journal said, theyre starting from a very low rate. Were starting from a very high rate.

Joe Biden: (11:56)
The expectation is well have another 200,000 Americans dead between now and the end of the year. If we just wore these masks, the presidents own advisors have told him, we can save a 100,000 lives. And were in a circumstance where the president thus far and still has no plan, no comprehensive plan.

Joe Biden: (12:19)
What I would do is make sure we have everyone encouraged to wear a mask all the time. I would make sure we move into the direction of rapid testing, investing in rapid testing. I would make sure that we set up national standards as to how to open up schools and open up businesses so they can be safe and give them the wherewithal, the financial resources to be able to do that.

Joe Biden: (12:41)
Were in a situation now where the New England Medical Journal, one of the serious, most serious journals in the whole world said for the first time ever that the way this president has responded to this crisis has been absolutely tragic. And so folks, I will take care of this. I will end this. I will make sure we have a plan.

Kristen Welker: (13:01)
President Trump, Id like to follow up with you and your comments. You talked about taking a therapeutic, I assume youre referencing Regeneron. You also said a vaccine will be coming within weeks. Is that a guarantee?

Donald Trump: (13:13)
No, its not a guarantee, but it will be by the end of the year. But I think it has a good chance. There are two companies, I think within a matter of weeks and it will be distributed very quickly.

Kristen Welker: (13:22)
Can you tell us which companies?

Donald Trump: (13:23)
Johnson & Johnson is doing very well. Moderna is doing very well. Pfizer is doing very well and we have numerous others. Then we also have others that were working on very closely with other countries, in particular Europe.

Kristen Welker: (13:35)
Let me follow up with you and because this is new information. You have set a vaccine is coming soon within weeks now. Your own officials say, It could take well into 2021 at the earliest for enough Americans to get vaccinated. And even then they say, The country will be wearing masks and distancing into 2022. Is your timeline realistic?

Donald Trump: (13:53)
No, I think my timeline is going to be more accurate. I dont know that theyre counting on the military the way I do, but we have our generals lined up, one in particular thats the head of logistics and this is a very easy distribution for him. Hes ready to go. As soon as we have the vaccine and we expect to have a 100 million vials. As soon as we have the vaccine, hes ready to go.

Kristen Welker: (14:13)
Vice President Biden, your reaction. And just 40% of Americans say they would definitely agree to take a coronavirus vaccine if it was approved by the government. What steps would you take to give Americans confidence in a vaccine if it were approved?

Joe Biden: (14:26)
Make sure its totally transparent. Have the scientists of the world see it, know it, look at it, go through all the processes. And by the way, this is the same fellow who told you, This is going to end by Easter last time. This is the same fellow who told you that, Dont worry, were going to end this by the summer. Were about to go into a dark winter, a dark winter and he has no clear plan. And theres no prospect that theres going to be a vaccine available for the majority of the American people before the middle of next year.

Kristen Welker: (14:54)
President Trump, your reaction. He says, you have no plan.

Donald Trump: (14:56)
I dont think were going to have a dark winter at all. Were opening up our country. Weve learned and studied and understand the disease, which we didnt at the beginning. When I closed and banned China from coming in heavily infected and then ultimately Europe, but China was in January. Months later, he was saying I was xenophobic. I did it too soon. Now hes saying, Oh, I should have moved quicker, but he didnt move quicker. He was months behind me, many months behind me.

Donald Trump: (15:24)
And frankly, he ran the H1N1 swine flu and it was a total disaster. Far less lethal, but it was a total disaster. Had that had this kind of numbers, 700,000 people would be dead right now, but it was a far less lethal disease. Look, his own person who ran that for him, who, as you know, was his chief of staff said, It was catastrophic. It was horrible. We didnt know what we were doing. Now he comes up and he tells us how to do this.

Donald Trump: (16:01)
Also, everything that he said about the way every single move that he said we should make, thats what weve done. Weve done all of it. But he was way behind us.

Kristen Welker: (16:10)
Vice President Biden, your response.

Joe Biden: (16:12)
My response is he is xenophobic, but not because he shutdown access from China. And he did it late after 40 countries had already done that. In addition to that, what he did, he made sure that we had 44 people that were in there in China trying to get the Wuhan to determine what exactly the source was. What did the president say in January? He said,  No. He said, Hes being transparent. The president of China is being transparent. We owe him a debt of gratitude. We have to thank him.

Joe Biden: (16:38)
And then what happened was we started talking about using the Defense Act to make sure we go out and get whatever is needed out there to protect people. And again, I go back to this. He had nothing, he did virtually nothing. And then he gets out of the hospital and he talks about, Oh, dont worry. Its all going to be over soon. Come on. Theres not another serious scientist in the world who thinks its going to be over soon.

Kristen Welker: (17:03)
President Trump, your reaction?

Joe Biden: (17:04)
I didnt say over soon. I say were learning to live with it. We have no choice. We cant lock ourselves up in a basement like Joe does. He has the ability to lock himself up. I dont know. Hes obviously made a lot of money someplace, but he has this thing about living in a basement. People cant do that. By the way I as the president couldnt do that. Id love to put myself in the basement or in a beautiful room in the White House and go away for a year and a half until it disappears. I cant do that.

Joe Biden: (17:31)
And Kirsten, every meeting I had, every meeting I had and Id meet a lot of families, including gold star families and military families. Every meeting I had and I had to meet them, I had to. It would be horrible to have canceled everything. I said, This is dangerous and you catch it. And I caught it. I learned a lot. I learned a lot. Great doctors, great hospitals. And now I recovered. 99.9 of young people recover. 99% of people recover. We have to recover-

Donald Trump: (18:03)
99% of people recover. We have to recover. We cant close up our nation. We have to open our school and we cant close up our nation, or youre not going to have a nation.

Kristen Welker: (18:11)
And, of course, the CDC has said young people can get sick with COVID-19 and can pass it. Vice President Biden, I want to talk broadly about strategy though.

Joe Biden: (18:20)
Can I respond to that?

Kristen Welker: (18:21)
30 seconds, please. Then I have a question.

Joe Biden: (18:23)
Number one, he says that were learning to live with it. People are learning to die with it. You folks home will have an empty chair at the kitchen table this morning. That man or wife going to bed tonight and reaching over to try to touch, there out of habit, where their wife or husband was, is gone. Learning to live with it. Come on. Were dying with it, because hes never said. See, you said, Its dangerous. Whens the last time? Is it really dangerous still? Are we dangerous. You tell the people its dangerous now. What should they do about the danger? And you say, I take no responsibility.

Kristen Welker: (18:56)
Let me talk about your Tuesday-

Donald Trump: (18:58)
Excuse me. I take full responsibility. Its not my fault that it came here. Its Chinas fault. And you know what? Its not Joes fault that it came here either. Its Chinas fault. They kept it from going into the rest of China for the most part, but they didnt keep it from coming out to the world, including Europe and ourselves.

Kristen Welker: (19:16)
Vice President Biden.

Joe Biden: (19:17)
The fact is that when we knew it was coming, when it hit, what happened? What did the President say? He said, Dont worry. Its going to go away. Itll be gone by Easter. Dont worry. Warm weather. Dont worry. Maybe inject bleach. He said he was kidding when he said that, but a lot of people thought it was serious. A whole range of things the President has said, even today, he thinks we are in control. Were about to lose 200,000 more people.

Kristen Welker: (19:43)
President Trump.

Donald Trump: (19:44)
Look, perhaps just to finish this, I was kidding on that, but just to finish this, when I closed he said I shouldnt have closed. And that went on for months. Nancy Pelosi said the same thing. She was dancing on the streets in Chinatown, in San Francisco. But when I closed, he said, This is a terrible thing, you xenophobic. I think he called me racist even, because I was closing it to China. Now he says I should have closed it earlier. Joe, it doesnt.

Joe Biden: (20:13)
I didnt say either of those things.

Donald Trump: (20:14)
You certainly did. You certainly did.

Joe Biden: (20:17)
I talked about his xenophobia in a different context. It wasnt about closing the border to Chinese coming to the United States.

Kristen Welker: (20:24)
All right, I want to talk about both of your different strategies to handling this.

Donald Trump: (20:27)
He thought I shouldnt have closed the border, thats obvious.

Kristen Welker: (20:31)
Do you want to respond to that quickly, Vice President Biden?

Joe Biden: (20:33)
No.

Kristen Welker: (20:33)
Okay. Lets talk about your different strategies toward dealing with this. Mr. Vice President you suggested you would support new shutdowns if scientists recommended it. What do you say to Americans who are fearful that the cost of shutdowns, the impact on the economy, the higher rates of hunger, depression, domestic, and substance abuse outweighs the risk of exposure to the virus?

Joe Biden: (20:54)
What I would say is, Im going to shut down the virus, not the country. Its his ineptitude that caused the country to have to shut down in large part, why businesses have gone under, why schools are closed, why so many people have lost their living, and why theyre concerned. Those other concerns are real. Thats why he should have been, instead of in a sand trap at his golf course, he should have been negotiating with Nancy Pelosi and the rest of the Democrats and Republicans about what to do about the acts they were passing for billions of dollars to make sure people had the capacity.

Kristen Welker: (21:23)
But you havent ruled out more shut downs?

Joe Biden: (21:25)
Oh, well, no. Im not shutting down today, but there are  Look, you need standards. The standard is, if you have a reproduction rate in a community thats above a certain level, everybody says, Slow up. More social distancing. Do not open bars and do not open gymnasiums. Do not open until you get this under control, under more control. But when you do open, give the people the capacity to be able to open and have the capacity to do it safely. For example, schools. Schools, they need a lot of money to be open. They need to deal with ventilation systems. They need to deal with smaller classes, more teachers, more pods, and hes refused to support that money, or at least up to now.

Kristen Welker: (22:04)
Lets talk about schools, President Trump-

Donald Trump: (22:06)
I think we have to respond, if I might.

Kristen Welker: (22:07)
Please. And then I have a follow-up.

Donald Trump: (22:09)
Thank you, and I appreciate that. Look, all he does is talk about shut downs. But forget about him. His Democrat Governors, Cuomo in New York, you look at whats going on in California, you look at Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Democrats, Democrats all, theyre shut down so tight and theyre dying. Theyre dying. And he supports all these people. All he talks about is shut downs. No, were not going to shut down. And we have to open our schools. And its like, as an example, I have a young son, he also tested positive. By the time I spoke to the doctor the second time, he was fine. It just went away. Young people, I guess, its their immune system.

Kristen Welker: (22:47)
Let me follow up with you, President Trump. Youve demanded schools open in person and insist they can do it safely. But just yesterday, Boston became the latest city to move its public school system entirely online after a coronavirus spike. What is your message to parents who worry that sending their children to school will endanger not only their kids but also their teachers and family?

Donald Trump: (23:05)
I want to open the schools. The transmittal rate to the teachers is very small. But I want to open the schools. We have to open our country. Were not going to have a country. You cant do this. We cant keep this country closed. This is a massive country with a massive economy. People are losing their jobs. Theyre committing suicide. Theres depression, alcohol, drugs at a level that nobodys ever seen before. Theres abuse, tremendous abuse. We have to open our country. Ive said it often, the cure cannot be worse than the problem itself, and thats whats happening. And he wants to close down. Hell close down the country if one person in our massive bureaucracy says we should close it down.

Kristen Welker: (23:50)
Vice President Biden, your response.

Joe Biden: (23:51)
Simply not true. We ought to be able to walk and chew gum at the same time. We ought to be able to safely open, but they need resources to open? You need to be able to, for example, if youre going to open a business, have social distancing within the business. You need to have, if you have a restaurant, you need to have plexiglass dividers so people cannot infect one another. You need to be in a position where you can take testing rapidly and know whether the person is in fact infected. You need to be able to trace. You need to be able to provide all the resources that are needed to do this. And that is not inconsistent with saying that were going to make sure that were going to open safely. And by the way, all you teachers out there, not that many of you are going to die, so dont worry about it. So dont worry about it. Come on.

Kristen Welker: (24:38)
President Trump, let me follow up with you quickly.

Donald Trump: (24:40)
By the way, I will say this, If you go and look at whats happened to New York, its a ghost town. Its a ghost town. And when you talk about plexiglass, these are restaurants that had dying. These are businesses with no money. Putting up plexiglass is unbelievably expensive, and its not the answer. I mean, youre going to sit there in a cubicle wrapped around with plastic. These are businesses that are dying, Joe. You cant do that to people. You just cant. Take a look at New York and whats happened to my wonderful city. For so many years, I loved it. It was vibrant. Its dying. Everyones leaving New York.

Kristen Welker: (25:15)
Vice President Biden.

Joe Biden: (25:15)
Take a look at what New York has done in terms of turning the curve down, in terms of the number of people dying. And I dont look at this in terms of the way he does, blue states and red states. Theyre all the United States. And look at the states that are having such a spike in the coronavirus. Theyre the red states, theyre the states in the Midwest, theyre the states in the upper Midwest. Thats where the spike is occurring significantly. But theyre all Americans. Theyre all Americans. And what we have to do is say, wear these masks, number one. Make sure we get the help that the businesses need. That moneys already been passed to do that. Its been out there since the beginning of the summer, and nothings happened.

Donald Trump: (25:55)
Kristen, New York has lost more than 40,000 people, 11,000 people in nursing homes.

Kristen Welker: (26:02)
President Trump, what about-

Donald Trump: (26:02)
When you say spike, take a look at whats happening in Pennsylvania where theyve had it closed. Take a look at whats happening with your friend in Michigan, where her husbands the only one allowed to do anything. Its been like a prison. Now, it was just ruled unconstitutional. Take a look at North Carolina, theyre having spikes and theyve been closed, and theyre getting killed financially. We cant let that happen, Joe. You cant let that happen. We have to open up. And we understand the disease. We have to protect our seniors. We have to protect our elderly. We have to protect especially our seniors with heart problems and diabetes problems. And we will protect. We have the best testing in the world by far. Thats why we have so many cases.

Kristen Welker: (26:44)
Let me follow up with you before we move on to our next section. President Trump, this week, you called Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nations best known infectious disease expert a disaster. You described him and other medical experts as idiots. If youre not listening to them, who are you listening to?

Donald Trump: (26:58)
Im listening to all of them, including Anthony. I get along very well with Anthony.

Donald Trump: (27:02)
 think to all of them, including Anthony. I get along very well with Anthony, but he did say, Dont wear masks. He did say, as you know, This is not going to be a problem. I think hes a Democrat, but thats okay. He said, This is not going to be a problem. We are not going to have a problem at all. When Joe says that I said, Anthony Fauci said, and others, and many others. And Im not knocking him, nobody knew. Look, nobody knew what this thing was. Nobody knew where it was coming from, what it was. Weve learned a lot. But Anthony said Dont wear masks, now he wants to wear masks. Anthony also said, if you look back, exact words, heres his exact words. This is no problem. This is going to go away soon. So hes allowed to make mistakes. He happens to be a good person.

Kristen Welker: (27:44)
Vice President Biden, your response quickly, and then were going to move on to the next section.

Joe Biden: (27:48)
My response is that think about what the President knew in January and didnt tell the American people. He was told this was a serious virus that spread in the air, and it was much worse, much worse, than the flu. He went on record and said to one of your colleagues, recorded, that in fact he knew how dangerous it was but he didnt want to tell us. He didnt want to tell us because he didnt want us to panic. He didnt want us Americans dont panic. He panicked. But guess what, in the meantime, we find out in the New York Times the other day, that in fact his folks went to Wall Street and said, This is a really dangerous thing. And a memo out of that meeting  not from his administration, but from some of the brokers  said, Sell short, because weve got to get moving. Its a dangerous problem.

Donald Trump: (28:31)
Well, this is what I-

Kristen Welker: (28:31)
Im going to give you 30 seconds to respond and then were going to move on.

Donald Trump: (28:34)
[crosstalk 00:28:34] I dont know. Somebody went through Wall Street. Youre the one that takes all the money from Wall Street. I dont take it.

Joe Biden: (28:39)
I havent-

Donald Trump: (28:39)
Joe, you have raised a lot of money, tremendous amounts of money. And every time you raise money deals are made, Joe. I could raise so much more money. As President, and as somebody that knows most of those people, I could call the heads of Wall Street, the heads of every company in America. I would blow away every record. But I dont want to do that because it puts me in a bad position. And then you bring up Wall Street? You shouldnt be bringing up Wall Street, because youre the one that takes the money from Wall Street, not me. I could blow away your records like you wouldnt believe. We dont need money. We have plenty of money. In fact, we beat Hillary Clinton with a tiny fraction of the money that she was able to [crosstalk 00:29:15]

Kristen Welker: (29:15)
All right, gentlemen, were going to move on.

Donald Trump: (29:16)
Dont tell me about [crosstalk 00:29:17].

Joe Biden: (29:18)
Average contribution, $43.

Kristen Welker: (29:19)
All right. Were going to move on to our next section, which is national security. And I do want to start with the security of our elections and some breaking news from overnight. Just last night, top intelligence officials confirmed again that both Russia and Iran are working to influence this election. Both countries have obtained US voter registration information, these officials say, and Iran sent intimidating messages to Florida voters. This question goes to you, Mr. Vice President. What would you do to put an end to this threat? You have two minutes, uninterrupted.

Joe Biden: (29:49)
I made it clear and I asked everyone else to take the pledge. I made it clear that any country, no matter who it is, that interferes in American elections will pay a price. They will pay a price. And its been overwhelmingly clear this election  I wont even get into the last one  this election, that Russia has been involved, Chinas been involved to some degree, and now we learn that Iran is involved. They will pay a price if Im elected. Theyre interfering with American sovereignty. Thats whats going on right now. Theyre interfering with American sovereignty.

Joe Biden: (30:23)
And to the best of my knowledge, I dont think the President has said anything to Putin about it. I dont think hes talking to them a lot. I dont think hes said a word. I dont know why he hasnt said a word to Putin about it, and I dont know what he has recently said, if anything, to the Iranians. My guess is hed probably be more outspoken with regard to the Iranians.

Joe Biden: (30:40)
But the point is this, folks. We are in a situation where we have foreign countries trying to interfere in the outcome of our election. His own National Security Advisor told him that what is happening with his buddy Well, I shouldnt Well, I will. His buddy Rudy Giuliani. Hes being used as a Russian pawn. Hes being fed information that is Russian that is not true. And then what happens? Nothing happens. And then you find out that everything thats going on here, about Russia is wanting to make sure that I do not get elected the next President of the United States, because they know I know them, and they know me.

Joe Biden: (31:20)
I dont understand why this President is unwilling to take on Putin when hes actually paying bounties to kill American soldiers in Afghanistan, when hes engaged in activities that are trying to destabilize all of NATO. I dont know why he doesnt do it, but its worth asking the question. Why isnt that being done? Any country that interferes with us will, in fact, pay a price, because theyre affecting our sovereignty.

Kristen Welker: (31:45)
President Trump, same question to you. [crosstalk 00:31:48] Let me ask the question. Youre going to have two minutes to respond. For two elections in a row now, there has been substantial interference from foreign adversaries. What would you do in your next term to put an end to this? Two minutes, uninterrupted.

Donald Trump: (31:58)
Well, let me respond to the first part, as Joe answered. Joe got $3.5 million from Russia and it came through Putin, because he was very friendly with the former mayor of Moscow and it was the mayor of Moscows wife. And you got $3.5 million. Your family got $3.5 million. And someday youre going to have to explain, why did you get three and a half? I never got any money from Russia. I dont get money from Russia.

Donald Trump: (32:22)
Now, about your thing last night. I knew all about that. And through John  who is John Ratcliffe, who is fantastic, DNI  he said the one thing thats common to both of them.

Donald Trump: (00:00)
They both want you to lose because there has been nobody tougher to Russia between the sanctions, nobody tougher than me on Russia, between the sanctions, between all of what Ive done with NATO. Ive got the NATO countries to put up an extra $130 billion going to $420 billion a year. Thats to guard against Russia. I sold, while he was selling pillows and sheets, I sold tank busters to Ukraine. There has been nobody tougher on Russia than Donald Trump.

Donald Trump: (00:33)
And Ill tell you, they were so bad. They took over the submarine port, you remember that very well, during your term, during you and Barack Obama. They took over a big part of what should have been Ukraine. You handed it to them. But you were getting a lot of money from Russia. They were paying you a lot of money, and they probably still are. But now, with what came out today, its even worse. All of the emails, the emails, the horrible emails of the kind of money that you were raking in, you and your family. And Joe, you were vice-president when some of this was happening, and it should have never happened. And I think you owe an explanation to the American people. Why is it, somebody just had a news conference a little while ago who was essentially supposed to work with you and your family, but what he said was damning. And regardless of me, I think you have to clean it up and talk to the American people. Maybe you can do it right now.

Kristen Welker: (01:29)
Vice-President Biden, you may respond-

Joe Biden: (01:31)
[crosstalk 00:01:31].

Kristen Welker: (01:31)
 and then I do want to follow up on the election security.

Joe Biden: (01:33)
I have not taken a penny from any foreign source ever in my life. We learned that this president paid 50 times the tax in China as a secret bank account with China, does business in China, and in fact, is talking about me taking money? I have not taken a single penny from any country, whatsoever, ever, number one.

Joe Biden: (01:57)
Number two, this is a president I have released all of my tax returns, 22 years, go look at them, 22 years of my tax return. You have not released a single solitary year of your tax return. What are you hiding? Why are you unwilling? The foreign countries are paying you a lot. Russias paying you a lot. Chinas paying you a lot on your hotels and all your businesses all around the country, all around the world. And Chinas building a new road to a new golf course you have overseas. So, whats going on here? Release your tax return or stop talking about corruption.

Kristen Welker: (02:32)
President Trump, your response.

Donald Trump: (02:33)
First of all, I called my accountants, underwrote it, Im going to release them as soon as we can. I want to do it. And itll show how successful, how great this company is. But much more importantly than that, people were saying $750. I asked them a week ago, I said, What did I pay? They said, Sir, you prepaid tens of millions of dollars. I prepaid my tax, over the last number of years, tens of millions of dollars, I prepaid, because at some point, they think its an estimate. They think I may have to pay tax. So I already prepaid it. Nobody told me that. Nobody told you that.

Kristen Welker: (03:11)
Did your accountant tell you [crosstalk 00:03:11]?

Donald Trump: (03:11)
Excuse me. And it wasnt written. Whenever they write this, they keep talking about $750, which I think is a filing fee, but let me just tell you, I prepaid millions and millions of dollars in taxes, number one.

Donald Trump: (03:23)
Number two, I dont make money from China. You do. I dont make money from Ukraine. You do. I dont make money from Russia. You made $3.5 million, Joe, and your son gave you, they even have a statement that we have to give 10% to the big man. Youre the big man, I think. I dont know, maybe youre not, but youre the big man, I think. Your son said we have to give 10% to the big men. Joe, whats that all about? Its terrible.

Kristen Welker: (03:50)
All right, gentlemen. I want to ask you both some questions about all of this, but

Joe Biden: (03:52)
I have to respond to that.

Kristen Welker: (03:53)
Im going to let you both respond very quickly. You just said you spoke to your accountant about potentially releasing your taxes, did he tell you when you can release them? Do you have a deadline for when youre going to release them to the American people?

Donald Trump: (04:02)
As soon as the auditors finish. I get treated worse than the tea party got treated, because I have a lot of people in there-

Kristen Welker: (04:07)
[crosstalk 00:04:06].

Donald Trump: (04:08)
 deep down in the IRS, they treat me horribly. We made a deal, it was all settled until I decide to run for president. I get treated very badly by the IRS, very unfairly, but we had a deal all done. As soon as were completed with the deal, I want to release it, but I have paid millions and millions of dollars and its worse than paying. I paid in advance. Its called prepaying your taxes. I paid [crosstalk 00:04:32].

Kristen Welker: (04:31)
Okay. I want to ask you both about questions regarding your potential foreign entanglements and questions that have been raised to give you both a chance to talk about this more broadly. Respond very quickly, and then Ill get to my question.

Joe Biden: (04:43)
Why did he hes been saying this for four years, show us, just show us, stop playing around. Youve been saying for four years youre going to release your taxes.

Donald Trump: (04:52)
Everybody knows.

Joe Biden: (04:53)
Nobody knows, Mr. President. What they do know is youre not paying your taxes, or youre paying taxes that are so low, when last time he said, what he paid, he said, I only pay that little because Im smart. I know how to game the system. Come on. Come on, folks.

Donald Trump: (05:10)
So

Kristen Welker: (05:11)
[crosstalk 00:05:11] President Trump, and then I want to get to two questions to both of you on this.

Joe Biden: (05:13)
Sure.

Donald Trump: (05:14)
I was put through a phony witch hunt for three years. It started before I even got elected. They spied of my campaign. No president should ever have to go through what I went through. Let me just say this, Mueller and 18 angry Democrats and FBI agents all over the place spent $48 million. They went through everything I had, including my tax returns, and they found absolutely no collusion and nothing wrong. $48 million. I guarantee you, if I spent $1 million on you, Joe, I could find plenty wrong because the kind of things-

Kristen Welker: (05:52)
All right.

Donald Trump: (05:52)
 that youve done and the kind of monies that your family has taken, I mean, your brother made money in Iraq-

Kristen Welker: (05:58)
Let me

Donald Trump: (05:58)
 millions of dollars. Your other brother made a fortune, and its all through you, Joe. And they say you get some of it. And you do live very well, you have houses all over the place. You live very well.

Kristen Welker: (06:08)
All right, gentlemen. Let me just ask some questions about all of this broadly. Vice-President Biden, there have been questions about the work your son has done in China and for a Ukrainian energy company when you were vice-president, in retrospect, was anything about those relationships inappropriate or unethical?

Joe Biden: (06:24)
Nothing was unethical. Heres what the deal. With regard to Ukraine. We had this whole question about whether or not, because he was on the board, I later learned of Burisma, a company that somehow, I had done something wrong, yet every single solitary person, when he was going through his impeachment, testifying under oath, who work for him, said I did my job impeccably. I carried out U.S. policy, not one single solitary thing was out of line, not a single thing, number one.

Joe Biden: (06:57)
Number two, the guy who got in trouble in Ukraine was this guy trying to bribe the Ukrainian government to say something negative about me, which they would not do and did not do because it never ever, ever happened. My son has not made money in terms of this thing about, what are you talking about, China. I have not had the only guy who made money from China is this guy. Hes the only one. Nobody else has made money from China.

Kristen Welker: (07:25)
President Trump-

Donald Trump: (07:25)
[crosstalk 00:07:25]

Kristen Welker: (07:26)
 let me ask my question to you [crosstalk 00:07:28]

Donald Trump: (07:28)
But could I just one thing?

Kristen Welker: (07:29)
Very quickly.

Donald Trump: (07:29)
His son didnt have a job for a long time, was, sadly, no longer in the military service, I wont get into that, and he didnt have a job. As soon as he became vice-president, Burisma, not the best reputation in the world, I hear they paid him $183,000 a month, listen to this, $183,000, and they gave him a $3 million upfront payment, and he had no energy experience. Thats 100% dishonest.

Kristen Welker: (07:55)
All right. Im going to let the vice-president respond to that quickly, and then I need to get to a question to you. Very quickly, Mr. Vice-President.

Joe Biden: (08:01)
No basis for that. Everybody investigated that. No one said anything he did was wrong in Ukraine.

Kristen Welker: (08:03)
Okay. President Trump, this is for you. Since you took office, youve never divested from your business. Youve personally promoted your properties abroad. A report this week, which was referenced, does indicate that your company has a bank account in China. So how can voters know that you dont have any foreign conflicts of interest?

Donald Trump: (08:19)
I have many bank accounts and theyre all listed and theyre all over the place. I mean, I was a businessman doing business. The bank account youre referring to, which is, everybody knows about it, its listed, the bank account was in 2013. Thats what it was. It was opened. It was closed in 2015, I believe. And then I decided, because I was going to do I was thinking about doing a deal in China, like millions of other people, I was thinking about it and I decided Im not going to do it, didnt like it, I decided not to do it, had an account open and I closed it.

Kristen Welker: (08:54)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (08:54)
Excuse me. And then, unlike him where hes vice-president and he does business, I then decided to run for president after that. That was before. So I closed it before I even ran for president, let alone became president, big difference. He is the vice-president of the United States and his son, his brother, and his other brother are getting rich. Theyre like a vacuum cleaner. Theyre sucking up money [crosstalk 00:09:20].

Kristen Welker: (09:19)
Okay. President Trump, thank you. We do need to move on.

Joe Biden: (09:21)
Not true.

Kristen Welker: (09:22)
I do want to ask you, Vice-President Biden, about China. Lets talk about China more broadly. There have, of course, President Trump has said that they should pay for not being fully transparent in regards to the coronavirus. If you were president, would you make China pay? And please be specific, what would that look like?

Joe Biden: (09:41)
What Id make China do is play by the international rules, not like he has done. He has caused the deficit of the China to go up, not down, with China, up, not down. We are making sure that in order to do business in China, you have to give all your intellectual property. You have to have a partner in China. Its 51%, we would not do that at all, number one.

Joe Biden: (10:03)
Number two, were in a situation where China would have to play by the rules internationally as well. When I met with Xi and when I was still vice-president, he said were setting up air identification zones in the South China Sea. You cant fly through them. I said were going to fly through them. We just flew B-52, B-1 bombers through it. Were not going to pay attention. They have to play by the rules. And whats he do? He embraces guys like the thugs, like in North Korea and the Chinese president and Putin and others, and he pokes his finger [inaudible 00:10:36] all of our friends, all of our allies. We make up only were 25%, 25% of the worlds economy. We need to be having the rest of our friends with us saying to China, These are the rules. You play by them, or youre going to pay the price for not paying by them economically.

Joe Biden: (10:54)
Thats the way I will run it, and thats what we did and upholding steel tariffs and a range of other things when we were president and vice-president.

Kristen Welker: (11:01)
All right. Lets talk about North Korea.

Donald Trump: (11:02)
No, no, no.

Kristen Welker: (11:03)
Let

Donald Trump: (11:03)
Excuse me. No, I have to

Joe Biden: (11:03)
 and Vice President.

Kristen Welker: (11:03)
All right, lets talk about North Korea-

Donald Trump: (11:03)
Excuse me. No, I have to respond to that.

Kristen Welker: (11:05)
Okay. Very quickly, and then were going to move on to North Korea.

Donald Trump: (11:07)
His son walked out with a billion and a half dollars from China to 

Joe Biden: (11:08)
Not true.

Donald Trump: (11:10)
 after spending 10 minutes in office and being in Air Force Two. Number one. Number two, theres a very strong email talking about your family wanting to make $10 million a year for introductions.

Kristen Welker: (11:22)
President Trump, on China policy-

Joe Biden: (11:24)
Thats not true.

Kristen Welker: (11:24)
 though, what specifically-

Donald Trump: (11:24)
No, but wait a minute.

Kristen Welker: (11:25)
What are you going to do, what specifically are you going to do to make China pay? Youve said youre going to make them pay.

Donald Trump: (11:30)
First of all, China is paying. Theyre paying billions and billions of dollars. I just gave $28 billion.

Kristen Welker: (11:35)
New sanctions?

Donald Trump: (11:36)
I just gave $28 billion to our farmers.

Joe Biden: (11:39)
Tax payers money.

Donald Trump: (11:41)
Its what?

Joe Biden: (11:42)
Taxpayers money. Didnt come from China.

Donald Trump: (11:44)
No, no. You know who the taxpayer is? Its called China.

Joe Biden: (11:46)
Not true.

Donald Trump: (11:46)
China pays 28 billion, and you know what they did to pay it, Joe? They devalued their currency and they also paid up, and you know got the money? Our farmers, our great farmers, because they were targeted. You never charged them anything. Also, I charged them 25% on dumped steel, because they were killing our steel industry. We were not going to have a steel industry.

Kristen Welker: (12:06)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (12:06)
And now we have a steel industry.

Kristen Welker: (12:07)
Okay. Vice President Biden, your response, please.

Joe Biden: (12:09)
My response is, look, theres a reason why hes bringing up all this malarkey. Theres a reason for it. He doesnt want to talk about the substantive issues. Its not about his family and my family. Its about your family, and your familys hurting badly. If youre a middle-class family, youre getting hurt badly right now. Youre sitting at the kitchen table this morning deciding, Well, we cant get new tires. Theyre bald, because we have to wait another month or so. Or, Are we going to be able to pay the mortgage? Or, Whos going to tell her she cant go back to community college? Theyre the decisions youre making, and the middle-class families like I grew up in Scranton and Claymont, theyre in trouble. We should be talking about your families, but thats the last thing he wants to talk about.

Donald Trump: (12:53)
That is a typical statement.

Joe Biden: (12:54)
I want to talk about North Korea.

Donald Trump: (12:56)
Excuse me. Just for one second, please.

Kristen Welker: (12:57)
10 seconds, Mr. President. 10 seconds.

Donald Trump: (12:59)
Thats a typical political statement. Lets get off this China thing, and then he looks, The family around the table, everything. Just a typical politician when I see that. Im not a typical politician.

Kristen Welker: (13:07)
Lets talk about North Korea now.

Donald Trump: (13:08)
Thats why I got elected. Lets get off the subject of China. Lets talk about sitting around the table. Come on, Joe. You could do better.

Kristen Welker: (13:16)
Were going to talk about North Korea now. President Trump, youve met with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un three times. Youve talked about your beautiful letters with him. Youve touted the fact that there hasnt been a war or a long range missile test, and yet North Korea recently rolled out its biggest ever intercontinental ballistic missile and continues to develop its nuclear arsenal. Do you see that as a betrayal of the relationship you forged.

Donald Trump: (13:38)
No.

Kristen Welker: (13:38)
Just 30 seconds here because we need to get onto the next topic.

Donald Trump: (13:40)
So when I met with Barack Obama, we sat in the White House, right at the beginning, had a great conversation. Was supposed to be 15 minutes and it was well over an hour. He said, The biggest problem we have is North Korea. He indicated we will be in a war with North Korea. Guess what? It would be a nuclear war. And he does have plenty of nuclear capability. In the meantime, I have a very good relationship with him. Different kind of a guy, but he probably thinks the same thing about me. We have a different kind of a relationship. We have a very good relationship and theres no war. And about two months ago, he broke into a certain area. They said, Oh, theres going to be trouble. I said, No, theyre not, because hes not going to do that. And I was right. Look, instead of being in a war where millions of people, Seoul is 25 miles away, millions and millions, 32 million people. Millions of people would be dead right now. We dont have a war and I have a good relationship.

Kristen Welker: (14:31)
President Trump, thats 30 seconds. Vice President Biden to you. North Korea conducted four nuclear tests under the Obama administration. Why do you think you would be able to reign in this persistent threatening?

Joe Biden: (14:42)
Because Id make it clear, which we were making clear to China, they had to be part of the deal, because I made it clear as a spokesperson for the illustration when I went to China that I said, Why are you moving your missile defense up so close? Why are you moving more forces here? Why are you continue to do military maneuvers with South Korea? I said, Because North Korea is a problem, and were going to continue to do it so we can control them. Were going to make sure we can control them and make sure they can not hurt us. And so if you want to do something about it, step up and help. If not, its going to continue. What has he done? Hes legitimized North Korea. Hes talked about his good buddy, whos a thug, a thug. And he talks about how were better off. And they have much more capable missiles, able to reach us territory much more easily than they ever did before.

Kristen Welker: (15:31)
Let me follow up with you, Vice President Biden. Youve said you wouldnt meet with Kim Jong-un without preconditions. Are there any conditions under which you would meet with him?

Joe Biden: (15:39)
On the condition that he would agree that he would be drawing down his nuclear capacity. The Korean Peninsula should be a nuclear free zone.

Kristen Welker: (15:48)
All right. Lets move on to American families.

Donald Trump: (15:51)
Kristen.

Kristen Welker: (15:51)
Very quickly, 10 seconds, President Trump.

Donald Trump: (15:53)
They tried to meet with him. He wouldnt do it. He didnt like Obama. He didnt like him. He wouldnt do it.

Kristen Welker: (15:59)
Okay, Ive got to give him a chance to respond to that before we move on.

Donald Trump: (16:01)
I know for a fact. They tried. We wouldnt do it. And thats okay. You know what? North Korea, were not in a war. We have a good relationship. People dont understand. Having a good relationship with leaders of other countries is a good thing.

Kristen Welker: (16:12)
President Trump, we have to move on, because we have a lot of questions to get to. Your response.

Joe Biden: (16:15)
We had a good relationship with Hitler before he, in fact, invaded Europe, the rest of Europe. Come on. The reason he would not meet with President Obama is because President Obama said, Were going to talk about denuclearization. Were not going to legitimize you and were going to continue to push stronger and stronger sanctions on you. Thats why he wouldnt meet with us.

Kristen Welker: (16:36)
All right, lets move on.

Donald Trump: (16:38)
And it didnt happen.

Kristen Welker: (16:38)
Lets move on and talk about American families.

Donald Trump: (16:38)
Excuse me. He left me a mess. Kristen.

Kristen Welker: (16:40)
President Trump. Okay

Donald Trump: (16:41)
They left me a mess. North Korea was a mess, and in fact, if you remember the first two or three months. It was a very dangerous period in my first three months before we worked things out a little bit.

Kristen Welker: (16:54)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (16:54)
There was a very day. They left us a mess, and Obama would be, I think, the first to say it, was the single biggest problem he thought that our country [crosstalk 00:17:03].

Kristen Welker: (17:03)
Okay, lets move on to American families and the economy. One of the issues thats most important to them is healthcare, as you both know. Today, there was a key vote on a new Supreme Court Justice, Amy Coney Barrett, and healthcare is at the center of her confirmation fight. Over 20 million Americans get their health insurance through the Affordable Care Act. Its headed to the Supreme Court and your administration, Mr. President, is advocating for the court to overturn it. If the Supreme Court does overturn that law, theres 20 million Americans could lose their health insurance almost overnight. So what would you do if those people have their health insurance taken away? You have two minutes uninterrupted.

Donald Trump: (17:40)
First of all, Ive already done something that nobody thought was possible. Through the legislature, I terminated the individual mandate. That is the worst part of Obamacare, as we call it. The individual mandate where you have to pay a fortune for the privilege of not having to pay for bad health insurance, I terminated. Its gone. Now, its in court, because Obamacare is no good. But then I made a decision, run it as well as you can, to my people, great people, run it as well as you can. I could have gone the other route and made everybody very unhappy. They ran it. Premiums are down. Everythings down. Heres the problem. No matter how well you run it, its no good. What wed like to do is terminate it. We have the individual mandate done. I dont know that its going to work. If we dont win, we will have to run it and well have Obamacare, but itll be better run. But it no longer is Obamacare, because without the individual mandate, its much different.

Donald Trump: (18:36)
Pre-existing conditions will always stay. What I would like to do is a much better healthcare, much better. Well always protect people with pre-existing. So Id like to terminate Obamacare, come up with a brand new, beautiful healthcare. The Democrats will do it, because therell be tremendous pressure on them. And we might even have the House by that time. And I think were going to win the House. Youll see, but I think were going to win the House. But come up with a better healthcare, always protecting people with pre-existing conditions. And one thing very important, we have 180 million people out there that have great private healthcare. Far more than were talking about with Obamacare. Joe Biden is going to terminate all of those policies. These are people that love their healthcare. People that have been successful, middle-income people, been successful. They have 180 million plans, 180 million people, families. Under what he wants to do, which will basically be socialized medicine, he wont even have a choice, they want to terminate 180 million plans. We have done an incredible job at healthcare, and were going to do even better. Just you watch.

Kristen Welker: (19:43)
Okay. Vice President Biden, yes, this is for you. Your healthcare plan calls for building on Obamacare. So my question is, what is your plan if the law is ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court? You have two minutes uninterrupted.

Joe Biden: (19:56)
What Im going to do is pass Obamacare with a public option, and become Bidencare. The public option is an option that says that if you in fact do not have the wherewithal, if you qualify for Medicaid and you do not have the wherewithal in your state to get Medicaid, you automatically are enrolled, providing competition for insurance companies. Thats whats going to happen. Secondly, were going to make sure we reduce the premiums and reduce drug prices by making sure that theres competition, that doesnt exist now, by allowing Medicare to negotiate drug prices with the insurance companies. Thirdly, the idea that I want to eliminate private insurance, the reason why I had such a fight with 20 candidates for the nomination was I support private insurance. Thats why. Not one single person with private insurance would lose their insurance under my plan, nor did they under Obamacare. They did not lose their insurance unless they chose they wanted to go to something else.

Joe Biden: (20:59)
Lastly, were going to make sure were in a situation that we actually protect pre-existing. Theres no way he can protect pre-existing conditions. None, zero. You cant do it in the ether. Hes been talking about this for a long time. Hes never come up with a plan. I guess were going to get the pre-existing condition plan the same time we got the infrastructure plan that we waited for since 17, 18, 19, and 20. I still have a few more minutes. I know youre getting anxious. The fact is that hes already cost the American people, because of his terrible handling of the COVID virus and economic spillover. 10 million people have lost their private insurance, and he wants to take away 22 million more people who have it under Obamacare and over 110 million people with pre-existing conditions. And all the people from COVID are going to have pre-existing conditions, what are they going to do?

Kristen Welker: (21:51)
I have a follow-up for you Vice President Biden. It relates to something that President Trump said. Hes accusing you of wanting socialized medicine. What do you say to people who have concerns that your healthcare plan, which includes a government insurance option, takes-

Kristen Welker: (22:03)
Concerns that your healthcare plan, which includes a government insurance option, takes the country one step closer to a healthcare system run entirely by the government. Whats your response to that?

Joe Biden: (22:09)
I say its ridiculous. Its like saying that the fact that theres a public option that people can choose, that makes it a socialist plan. Look, the difference between the president and I I think healthcare is not a privilege, its a right. Everyone should have the right to have affordable healthcare, and I am very proud of my plan. Its gotten endorsed by all the major labor unions, as well as a whole range of other people who, in fact, are concerned in the medical field. This is something thats going to save peoples lives. And this is going to give some people an opportunity to have healthcare for their children. How many of you at home are worried and rolling around in bed tonight, wondering what in Gods name youre going to do if you get sick, because youve lost your health insurance and your companys gone under? We have to provide health insurance for people at an affordable rate, and thats what I do.

Kristen Welker: (23:00)
President Trump-

Donald Trump: (23:00)
Excuse me. He was there-

Kristen Welker: (23:01)
 your response.

Donald Trump: (23:02)
 for 47 years. He didnt do it. He was now there as vice president for eight years. And its not like it was 25 years ago. It was three and three quarters It was just a little while ago, right? Less than four years ago. He didnt do anything. He didnt do it. He wants socialized medicine. And its not that he wants it. His vice president, she is more liberal than Bernie Sanders and wants it even more. Bernie Sanders wants it. The Democrats want it. Youre going to have socialized medicine, just like you want it with fracking. Were not going to have fracking. Were going to stop fracking. Were going to stop fracking. Then he goes to Pennsylvania after he gets a nomination, where he got very lucky to get it. And he goes to Pennsylvania, and he says, Oh, were going to have fracking. And you never ask that question. And by the way, so far, I respect very much the way youre handling this, I have to say.

Joe Biden: (23:50)
By the way-

Donald Trump: (23:50)
But somebody should ask the question.

Joe Biden: (23:52)
You can ask it.

Donald Trump: (23:52)
He goes for a year, there will be no fracking.

Kristen Welker: (23:55)
We do have a number-

Donald Trump: (23:56)
There will be no petroleum-

Kristen Welker: (23:56)
We have a number of topics were going to get to.

Donald Trump: (24:00)
No, no. But thats a big question.

Kristen Welker: (24:01)
Were going to get to a number of topics-

Donald Trump: (24:01)
Its the same thing with socialized medicine.

Joe Biden: (24:03)
I have to respond to healthcare.

Kristen Welker: (24:04)
Vice President, your response please.

Joe Biden: (24:04)
My response is, people deserve to have affordable healthcare, period. Period, period, period. And the Biden care proposal will in fact provide for that affordable healthcare, lower premiums. What were going to do is going to cost some money. Its going to cost over $750 billion over 10 years to do it. And theyre going to have lower premiums. You can buy into the better plans, the cheaper plans, lower your premiums, deal with unexpected billing, and have your drug prices drop significantly. He keeps talking about it. He hasnt done a thing for anybody on healthcare. Not a thing.

Donald Trump: (24:37)
Kristen, when he says-

Kristen Welker: (24:38)
Very quickly, then I want to talk about whats happening on Capitol Hill.

Donald Trump: (24:39)
When he says public option, hes talking about socialized medicine and healthcare. When he talks about a public option, hes talking about destroying your Medicare, totally destroying-

Joe Biden: (24:49)
Wrong.

Donald Trump: (24:49)
 and destroying your Social Security. And this whole country will come down. Bernie Sanders tried it in his state.

Joe Biden: (24:56)
Bernie.

Donald Trump: (24:56)
He tried it in his state. His governor was a very liberal governor. They wanted to make it work.

Kristen Welker: (25:00)
Okay. Lets hear-

Donald Trump: (25:01)
It was impossible to work.

Kristen Welker: (25:02)
Lets let Vice President Biden respond-

Donald Trump: (25:04)
It doesnt work.

Joe Biden: (25:05)
Hes a very confused guy. He thinks hes running against somebody else. Hes running against Joe Biden. I beat all those other people because I disagreed with them. Joe Biden, hes running against. And the idea that were in a situation that is going to destroy Medicare This is the guy that the actuary of Medicare said, If in fact Thats Social Security. If in fact he continues his plan to withhold the tax on Social Security, Social Security will be bankrupt by 2023 with no way to make up for it. This is the guy whos tried to cut Medicare. The idea that Donald Trump is lecturing me on Social Security and Medicare? Come on.

Donald Trump: (25:48)
He tried to get rid of-

Kristen Welker: (25:49)
10 seconds, Mr. President, and then I have to go to another question.

Donald Trump: (25:49)
He tried to hurt Social Security years ago. Years ago. Go back and look at the records. He tried to hurt Social Security years ago. One thing. But this is the guy-

Kristen Welker: (25:57)
All right. Lets move on. Im going to move on.

Donald Trump: (25:59)
 that when they announced last week-

Kristen Welker: (26:00)
Mr. President, I have to move on to the next question or else were not going to have time to talk about it.

Donald Trump: (26:02)
They say the stock market will boom if Im elected. If hes elected, the stock market will crash.

Kristen Welker: (26:09)
Okay. Lets move on to the next question.

Donald Trump: (26:09)
The biggest analysts are saying that.

Joe Biden: (26:10)
May I respond?

Kristen Welker: (26:10)
Very quickly.

Joe Biden: (26:12)
Look, the idea that the stock market is booming is his only measure of whats happening. Where I come from in Scranton and Claymont, the people dont live off of the stock market. Just in the last three years, during this crisis, the billionaires in this country made, according to Wall Street, 700 billion more dollars. 700 billion more dollars. Because thats his only measure. What happens to the ordinary people out there? What happens to them?

Kristen Welker: (26:41)
Lets talk about whats happening on Capitol Hill.

Donald Trump: (26:44)
401(k)s. Kristen, 401(k)s are through the roof.

Kristen Welker: (26:45)
Were going to move on.

Donald Trump: (26:46)
Peoples stock are through the roof.

Kristen Welker: (26:47)
All right.

Donald Trump: (26:48)
And he doesnt come from Scranton. He lived there for a short period of time before he even knew it.

Kristen Welker: (26:54)
Okay. Were going to move on to the next question.

Donald Trump: (26:55)
And he left. And the people of Pennsylvania will show you that.

Kristen Welker: (26:57)
Let me move on to my next question, gentlemen.

Donald Trump: (26:57)
They understand.

Kristen Welker: (26:58)
As of tonight, more than 12 million people are out of work. And as of tonight, 8 million more Americans have fallen into poverty, and more families are going hungry every day. Those hit hardest are women and people of color. They see Washington fighting over a relief bill. Mr. President, why havent you been able to get them the help they need? 30 seconds here.

Donald Trump: (27:18)
Because Nancy Pelosi doesnt want to approve it. I do.

Kristen Welker: (27:20)
But youre the president.

Donald Trump: (27:22)
I do. But I still have to get, unfortunately Thats one of the reasons I think were going to take over the House, because of her. Nancy Pelosi doesnt want to approve anything because shed love to have some victories on a date called November 3rd. Nancy Pelosi does not want to approve it. We are ready, willing, and able to do something. Dont forget, weve already approved three plans. And its gone through, including the Democrats, in all fairness. This one, she doesnt want. Its near the election. Because she thinks it helps her politically. I think it hurts her politically.

Kristen Welker: (27:50)
All right, Mr. Vice President-

Joe Biden: (27:51)
By the way, as you know, the Republican leader in the United States Senate said he cant pass it. He will be able to pass it. He does not have Republican votes. Why isnt he talking to his Republican friends?

Kristen Welker: (28:02)
Let me follow up with you, Vice President Biden because-

Donald Trump: (28:04)
If we made a deal, the Republicans will pass it.

Kristen Welker: (28:05)
Let me ask Vice President Biden a question. You are the leader of the Democratic party. Why have you not pushed the Democrats to get a deal for the American people?

Joe Biden: (28:13)
I have, and they have pushed it. Look, they passed this act all the way back in the beginning of the summer. Its not new. Its been out there. This HEROES Act has been sitting there. And look at whats happening. When I was in charge of the recovery act with $800 billion, I was able to get $145 billion to local communities that have to balance their budgets and states that have to balance their budgets. And then they have to fire firefighters, teachers, first responders, law enforcement officers, so they could keep their cities and counties running. He will not support that. They have not done a thing for them. And Mitch McConnell said, Let them go bankrupt. Let them go bankrupt. Come on. Whats the matter with these guys?

Donald Trump: (28:56)
The bill that was passed in the House was a bailout of badly run, high crime, Democrat, all run by Democrat cities and states. It was a way of getting a lot of money, billions and billions of dollars, to these guys. It was also a way of getting a lot of money from our peoples pockets to people that come into our country illegally. We were going to take care of everything for them. And Id love to do that. Id love to help them. But what that does, everybody all over the world will start pouring into our country. We cant do it. This was a way of taking care of them. This was a way of spending on things that had nothing to do with COVID, as per your question. But it was really a big bailout for badly run Democrat cities and states.

Kristen Welker: (29:39)
All right. I want to-

Joe Biden: (29:40)
By the way, if I get elected, Im not going to Im running as a proud Democrat, but Im going to be an American president. I dont see red states and blue states. What I see is American United States. And folks, every single state out there finds themself in trouble. Theyre going to start laying off, whether theyre red or blue, cops, firefighters, first responders, teachers, because they have to balance their budget. And the founders were smart. They allowed the federal government to deficit spend to compensate for the United States of America.

Kristen Welker: (30:10)
I want to talk about the minimum wage, gentlemen. Mr. Vice President, we are talking a lot about struggling small businesses and business owners these days. Do you think this is the right time to ask them to raise the minimum wage? You of course support a $15 federal minimum wage.

Joe Biden: (30:24)
I do, because I think one of the things were going to have to do is were going to have to bail them out too. We should be bailing them out now, those small businesses. You got one in six of them going under. Theyre not going to be able to make it back. They passed a package that allows us to be able They call it PPP. Money is supposed to go to help them do everything from organize how they can deal with their businesses being open safely, schools, how they can make classrooms smaller, how they can hire more teachers, how they can put ventilation systems in. They need the help. The businesses, as well as the schools, need the help. These guys will not help them. Its not giving them any of the money.

Kristen Welker: (31:05)
We are going to move on to immigration, but I want to get-

Donald Trump: (31:06)
Excuse me. One thing very quickly. He said we have to help our small businesses by raising the minimum wage. Thats not helping. I think it should be a state option. Alabama is different than New York. New York is different from Vermont. Every state is different. It should be a state option.

Kristen Welker: (31:21)
You said very recently-

Donald Trump: (31:22)
Its very important. We have to help our small businesses.

Kristen Welker: (31:25)
You said-

Donald Trump: (31:25)
How are you helping your small businesses when youre forcing wages? Whats going to happen, and whats been proven to happen, is when you do that, these small businesses fire many of their employees.

Kristen Welker: (31:35)
You said very recently-

Joe Biden: (31:35)
Not true, by the way.

Kristen Welker: (31:36)
 you would consider raising the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour.

Donald Trump: (31:39)
Say it. Say it.

Kristen Welker: (31:39)
You said recently you would consider raising the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour.

Donald Trump: (31:44)
What I really like, and I would consider it to an extent-

Kristen Welker: (31:46)
In a second administration?

Donald Trump: (31:47)
But what I really like In a second administration. But not to a level thats going to put all these businesses out of business. It should be a state option. Look, Ive lived-

Joe Biden: (31:55)
Every-

Donald Trump: (31:56)
 in different places. I know different places. Theyre all different. Some places, $ 15 is not so bad. In other places, other states, $15 would be ruinings.

Kristen Welker: (32:05)
Okay, President Trump, thank you. Quick response Vice President Biden.

Joe Biden: (32:09)
No one should work one job, be below poverty. People are making six, seven, eight bucks an hour. These first responders we all clap for as they come down the street because theyve allowed us to make it. Whats happening? They deserve a minimum wage of $15. Anything below that puts you below the poverty level. And there is no evidence that when you raise the minimum wage, businesses go out of business. That is simply not true.

Kristen Welker: (32:34)
Were going to talk about immigration.

Joe Biden: (32:35)
Its an [crosstalk 00:32:35]-

Kristen Welker: (32:37)
Were going to talk about immigration now, gentlemen. And were going to talk about families within this context. Mr. President, your administration separated children from their parents at the border, at least 4,000 kids. Youve since reversed your zero tolerance policy, but the United States cant locate the parents of more than 500 children. So how will these families ever be reunited?

Donald Trump: (32:57)
Children are brought here by coyotes and lots of bad people, cartels

Donald Trump: (33:02)
[inaudible 00:33:00] and lots of bad people, cartels, and theyre brought here and they used to use them to get into our country. We now have as strong a border as weve ever had. Were over 400 miles of brand new wall. You see the numbers. And we let people in, but they have to come in legally and they come in through [crosstalk 00:00:17]-

Kristen Welker: (33:17)
But how will you reunite these kids with their families, Mr. President?

Donald Trump: (33:20)
But let me just tell you. Let me just tell you. They built cages. They used to say I built the cages, and then they had a picture in a certain newspaper, and it was the picture of these horrible cages and they said, Look at these cages. President Trump built them. And then it was determined they were built in 2014. That was him. They built cages.

Kristen Welker: (33:39)
Do you have a plan to reunite the kids with their families?

Donald Trump: (33:39)
Yes. Were working on it very Were trying very hard. But a lot of these kids come out without the parents. They come over through cartels and through coyotes and through gangs.

Kristen Welker: (33:48)
Vice President Biden, let me bring you into this conversation. Quick response, and then another question to you.

Joe Biden: (33:52)
These 500-plus kids came with parents. They separated them at the border to make it a disincentive to come to begin with. Be real tough. Were really strong. And guess what? They cannot Coyotes didnt bring them over. Their parents were with them. They got separated from their parents. And it makes us a laughingstock and violates every notion of who we are as a nation.

Kristen Welker: (34:18)
Let me ask you a followup question.

Donald Trump: (34:19)
Kristen, they did it. We changed the policy. They did it. We changed.

Kristen Welker: (34:22)
Your response to that?

Joe Biden: (34:22)
We did not separate the [crosstalk 00:34:25]-

Donald Trump: (34:26)
They built the cages. Who built the cages, Joe?

Joe Biden: (34:27)
Lets talk about what were talking about.

Kristen Welker: (34:28)
Who built the cages, Joe?

Joe Biden: (34:29)
Lets talk about what were talking about. What happened? Parents were ripped Their kids were ripped from their arms and separated, and now they cannot find over 500 of the sets of those parents, and those kids are alone. Nowhere to go. Nowhere to go. Its criminal. Its criminal.

Kristen Welker: (34:49)
Let me ask you about [crosstalk 00:34:50] in 10 seconds and then I need to ask [crosstalk 00:34:53].

Donald Trump: (34:50)
Kristen, I will say this. They went down. We brought reporters, everything. They are so well taken care of. Theyre in facilities that were so clean.

Kristen Welker: (34:58)
But some of them havent been reunited with their families.

Donald Trump: (35:00)
They have gotten such good But just ask one question. Who built the cages? Id love you to ask him that. Who built the cages, Joe?

Kristen Welker: (35:05)
Let me ask about your immigration policy, Mr. Vice President. The Obama Administration did fail to deliver immigration reform, which had been a key promise during the administration. It also presided over record deportations, as well as, family detentions at the border before changing course. So why should voters trust you with an immigration overhaul now?

Joe Biden: (35:23)
Because we made a mistake made. It took too long to get it right. Took too long to get it right. Ill be President of the United States, not Vice President of the United States. And the fact is Ive made it very clear. Within a 100 days, Im going to send to the United States Congress a pathway to citizenship for over 11 million undocumented people. And all of those so-called dreamers, those DACA kids, theyre going to be immediately certified again to be able to stay in this country and put on a path to citizenship. The idea that they are being sent home by this guy and they want to do that is theyve gone to theyve never seen before. I can imagine. Youre five years old. Your parents are taking across the Rio Grande River and its illegal. And you say, Oh, no, Mom. Leave me here. Im not going to go with you. They been here. Many of them are model citizens. Over 20,000 of them are first responders out there taking care of people during this crisis. We owe them. We owe them.

Kristen Welker: (36:24)
President Trump, your reaction.

Donald Trump: (36:24)
Kristen, he had eight years to do what he said he was going to do. And Ive changed. Without having a specific, we got rid of catch and release. We got rid of a lot of horrible things that they put in and that they lived with. But he had eight years he was Vice President. He did nothing except build cages to keep children in.

Kristen Welker: (36:47)
Vice President Biden, your response.

Joe Biden: (36:48)
The catch and release, you know what hes talking about there? If in fact you had a family came across and they were arrested, they in fact were given a date to show up for their hearing. They were released. And guess what? They showed up for a hearing. And this is the first President in the history of the United States of America that anybody seeking asylum has to do it in another country. Thats never happened before in America. Thats never happened before in America. You come to the United States and you make your case that, I seek asylum based on the following premise, why I deserve it under American law. Theyre sitting in squalor on the other side of the river.

Kristen Welker: (37:27)
President Trump, your response. 30 seconds. And then well move on.

Donald Trump: (37:29)
So important. It just shows that he has no understanding of immigration, of the laws. Catch and release is a disaster. A murderer would come in. A rapist would come in. A very bad person would come in. We would take their name. We have to release them into our country. And then you say they come back. Less than 1% of the people come back. We have to send ICE out and Border Patrol out to find them. We would say, Come back in two years, three years. Were going to give you a court case. You did Perry Mason. Were going to give you a court case. When you say they come back, they dont come back, Joe. They never come back. Only the really I hate to say this, but those with the lowest IQ, they might come back, but there are very, very few.

Kristen Welker: (38:15)
Okay, President Trump. Lets give Vice President Biden a chance to respond, and then were going to move on to the next section.

Donald Trump: (38:20)
You dont know the law, Joe.

Kristen Welker: (38:21)
Vice President Biden, your response.

Joe Biden: (38:22)
Know the law, what hes telling you is simply not true. Check it out.

Donald Trump: (38:25)
Well, check it out. They dont come back.

Joe Biden: (38:26)
Check it out.

Kristen Welker: (38:27)
All right. Lets move on to the next section.

Donald Trump: (38:28)
But we dont have to worry about it, because they terminated it. So we dont have to worry about it anymore, Joe.

Kristen Welker: (38:30)
Lets move on to the next section.

Joe Biden: (38:32)
Thats right. And you 525 kids not knowing where in Gods name theyre going to be and lost their parents.

Donald Trump: (38:36)
Go ahead.

Kristen Welker: (38:37)
All right. Lets talk about our next section, which is race in America. And I want to talk about the way Black and Brown Americans experience race in this country. Part of that experience is something called the talk. It happens regardless of class and income, parents who feel they have no choice, but to prepare their children for the chance that they could be targeted, including by the police, for no reason other than the color of their skin. Mr. Vice President, in the next two minutes, I want you to speak directly to these families. Do you understand why these parents fear for their children?

Joe Biden: (39:14)
I do. I do. My daughter is a social worker and shes written a lot about this. She has her graduate degree from the University of Pennsylvania in social work. And one of the reasons why I ended up working on the East Side of Wilmington, Delaware, which is 90% African-American, was to learn more about what was going on. I never had to tell my daughter if shes pulled over, make sure she puts For a traffic stop. Put both hands on top of the wheel and dont reach for the glove box because someone may shoot you. But a Black parent, no matter how wealthy or how poor they are, has to teach their child, When youre walking down the street, dont have a hoodie on when you go across the street.

Joe Biden: (00:00)
Making sure that you, in fact, if you get pulled over just, yes, sir, no, sir. Hands on top of the wheel. Because you are in fact, the victim, whether youre a person making 300,000  child of a $300,000 a year person or someone whos on food stamps. The fact of the matter is, there is institutional racism in America. And we have always said, weve never lived up to it, that we hold these truths to be self-evident, all men and women are created equal. Well, guess what, we have never, ever lived up to it. But weve always constantly been moving the needle further and further to inclusion, not exclusion. This is the first president to come along and says, thats the end of that. Were not going to do that anymore. We have to provide for economic opportunity, better education, better healthcare, better access to schooling, better access to opportunity to borrow money to start businesses, all the things we can do. And Ive laid out a clear plan as to how to do those things just to give people a shot. Its about accumulating the ability to have wealth as well as it is to be free from violence.

Kristen Welker: (01:06)
President Trump, same question to you, and let me remind you of the question. I would like you to speak directly to these families, do you understand why these parents fear for their children?

Donald Trump: (01:15)
Yes, I do. And again, hes been in government 47 years, he never did a thing, except in 1994, when he did such harm to the black community, and they were called  and he called them superpredators. And he said that, he said it, superpredators. And they never lived that down. 1994, your crime bill, the superpredators. Nobody has done more for the black community than Donald Trump. And if you look, with the exception of Abraham Lincoln, possible exception, but the exception of Abraham Lincoln, nobody has done what Ive done. Criminal justice reform, Obama and Joe didnt do it. I dont even think they tried because they had no chance at doing it. They mightve wanted to do it. But if you had to see the arms I had to twist to get that done, it was not a pretty picture. And everybody knows it, including some very liberal people that cried in my office. They cried in the Oval Office.

Donald Trump: (02:15)
Two weeks later, theyre out saying, Gee, we have to defeat him. Criminal justice reform, prison reform, Opportunity Zones with Tim Scott, a great Senator from South Carolina. He came in with this incredible idea for Opportunity Zones. Its one of the most successful programs. People dont talk about it. Tremendous investment is being made, biggest beneficiary, the black and Hispanic communities. And then Historically Black Colleges and Universities, after three years of coming to the office, I love some of those guys, they were great. They came into the office and I said, What are you doing? After three years, I said, Why do you keep coming back? Because we have no funding. I said, You dont have to come back every year. We have to come back.

Donald Trump: (02:57)
Because President Obama would never give them long-term funding and I did. 10 year long-term funding and I gave them more money than they asked for because I said, I think you need more. And I said, The only bad part about this is I may never see you again. Because I got very friendly with them and they like me and I like them. But I saved Historically Black Colleges and Universities.

Kristen Welker: (03:19)
Okay, and were going to talk about both of your records, but your response to that Vice President.

Joe Biden: (03:23)
My response to that is I never ever said what he accused me of saying. The fact of the matter is in 2000 though, after the crime bill had been in the law for awhile, this is a guy who said, The problem with the crime bill, theres not enough people in jail. Theres not enough people in jail. And go on my website, get the quote, the date when he said it, not enough people. He talked about marauding gangs, young gangs, and the people who are going to maraud our cities. This is a guy who in the Central Park Five, five innocent black kids, he continued to push for making sure that they got the death penalty. None of them were guilty of the crimes they were suggested. Look and granted, he did in fact, let 20 people  he commuted 20 peoples sentences.

Joe Biden: (04:12)
We commuted over 1,000 peoples sentences, over 1,000. The very law hes talking about is a law that in fact, initiated by Barack Obama. And secondly, were in a situation here where the federal prison system was reduced by 38,000 people under our administration. And one of those things we should be doing, there should be no, no minimum mandatories in the law. Thats why Im offering $20 billion to states to change their state laws to eliminate minimum mandatories and set up drug courts. No one should be going to jail because they have a drug problem. They should be going to rehabilitation, not to jail. We should fundamentally change the system and thats what Im going to do.

Donald Trump: (04:53)
But why didnt he do it four years ago? Why didnt you do that four years ago? Even less than that. Why didnt you when you vice president? You keep talking about all these things youre going to do, and youre going to do this, but you were there just a short time ago and you guys did nothing.

Joe Biden: (05:09)
We did-

Donald Trump: (05:09)
You know Joe, I ran because of you. I ran because of Barack Obama, because you did a poor job. If I thought you did a good job, I wouldve never run. I wouldve never run. I ran because of you. Im looking at you now, youre a politician, I ran because of you.

Kristen Welker: (05:24)
All right, Vice President Biden, your response to that. And then I do have some questions for both of you.

Joe Biden: (05:28)
Well, Ill tell you what I hope he does look at me because whats happening here is, you know who I am. You know who he is, you know his character, you know my character, you know our reputations for honor and telling the truth. I am anxious to have this race. Im anxious to see this take place. I am  The character of the country is on the ballot. Our characters on the ballot, look at us closely.

Kristen Welker: (05:52)
Let me ask some follow up-

Donald Trump: (05:53)
Excuse me-

Kristen Welker: (05:53)
Please respond and then were going to have follow up questions.

Donald Trump: (05:55)
If this stuff is true about Russia, Ukraine, China, other countries, Iraq. If this is true, then hes a corrupt politician. So dont give me the stuff about how youre this innocent baby. Joe, that calling you a corrupt politician-

Joe Biden: (06:09)
Nobodys calling me-

Donald Trump: (06:10)
Theyre calling it the laptop from hell.

Kristen Welker: (06:10)
President Trump, I want to stay on the issue of race. Were talking about the issue-

Donald Trump: (06:13)
Excuse me, [crosstalk 00:06:13] the laptop from hell.

Joe Biden: (06:13)
Nobody.

Kristen Welker: (06:14)
President Trump, were talking about race right now. And I do want to stay on the issue of race. President Trump you-

Joe Biden: (06:20)
I have to respond to that. Because look-

Kristen Welker: (06:21)
Please, very quickly.

Joe Biden: (06:22)
There are 50 former national intelligence folks who said that what hes accusing me of is a Russian plant. They have said that this has all the  five former heads of the CIA, both parties, say what hes saying is a bunch of garbage. Nobody believes it except him and his good friend, Rudy Giuliani.

Donald Trump: (06:44)
You mean the laptop is now another Russia, Russia, Russia hoax? You got to be kidding me-

Joe Biden: (06:51)
Thats exactly what was told.

Donald Trump: (06:51)
This is where hes going. The laptop is Russia, Russia, Russia?

Kristen Welker: (06:55)
Gentlemen, I want to stay on the issue of race.

Donald Trump: (06:56)
You have to be kidding, here we go again with the Russia. Boy, oh, boy.

Kristen Welker: (06:59)
Were going to continue on the issue of race.

Donald Trump: (07:01)
Cant believe that one.

Kristen Welker: (07:01)
Mr. President youve described the Black Lives Matter movement as a symbol of hate. Youve shared a video of a man chanting white power to millions of your supporters. Youve said that black professional athletes exercising their First Amendment rights should be fired. What do you say to Americans who say that kind of language from a president is contributing to a climate of hate and racial strife?

Donald Trump: (07:24)
Well, you have to understand the first time I ever heard of Black Lives Matter, they were chanting, Pigs in a blanket, talking about police, pigs, pigs, talking about our police. Pigs in a blanket, fry them like bacon. I said, Thats a horrible thing. And they were marching down the street. And that was my first glimpse of Black Lives Matter, I thought it was a terrible thing. As far as my relationships with all people, I think I have great relationships with all people. I am the least racist person in this room.

Kristen Welker: (07:55)
What do you say to Americans who are concerned by that rhetoric [crosstalk 00:00:07:58]?

Donald Trump: (07:58)
I dont know. I mean, I dont know what to say. I got criminal justice reform done and prison reform and Opportunity Zones-

Donald Trump: (08:03)
 got criminal justice reform done, and prison reform, and Opportunity Zones, I took care of Black colleges and universities, I dont know what to say, they can say anything, I mean, they can say anything. Its a very Makes me sad, because I am the least racist person, I cant even see the audience because its so dark, but I dont care whos in the audience, Im the least racist person in this room.

Kristen Welker: (08:26)
Okay. Vice President Biden, let me ask you very quickly and then I have a follow-up question for you.

Joe Biden: (08:30)
Abraham Lincoln here is one of the most racist presidents weve had in modern history, he pours fuel on every single racist fire, every single one. Started off his campaign coming down the escalator saying hes getting rid of those Mexican rapists, hes ban Muslims because theyre Muslims, he has moved around and made everything worse across the board. He says to About the Proud Boys, last time we were on stage here he said, I tell them to stand down and stand ready. Come on, this guy has a dog whistle about as big as a foghorn.

Kristen Welker: (09:04)
President Trump, Im going to give you 10 seconds to respond and then I have a follow-up question.

Donald Trump: (09:07)
No, he made a reference to Abraham Lincoln, where did that come in? I mean-

Joe Biden: (09:10)
You said youre Abraham Lincoln.

Donald Trump: (09:12)
 where did that.. No.

Joe Biden: (09:13)
You said-

Donald Trump: (09:14)
I said, Not since Abraham Lincoln has anybody done what Ive done for the Black community.

Joe Biden: (09:19)
And Im saying-

Donald Trump: (09:20)
I didnt say, Im Abraham Lincoln, I said, Not since Abraham Lincoln has anybody done what Ive done for the Black community. Now, you have done nothing other than the Crime Bill, which put-

Joe Biden: (09:32)
Oh, God.

Donald Trump: (09:33)
Tens of thousands of Black men, mostly, in jail.

Joe Biden: (09:39)
Not true.

Kristen Welker: (09:39)
All right, let me ask Vice President Biden a question.

Donald Trump: (09:41)
And you know what? They remember it because if you look at whats happening with the voting right now, they remember that you treated them very, very badly, just take a look at whats happening out there.

Kristen Welker: (09:49)
Let me ask Vice President Biden about Vice President Biden, let me give you a chance to respond within this context, crime bills that you supported in the 80s and 90s contributed to the incarceration of tens of thousands of young Black men who had small amounts of drugs in their possession, they are sons, they are brothers, they are fathers, they are uncles, whose families are still to this day, some of them suffering the consequences. So, speak to those families, why should they vote for you?

Joe Biden: (10:11)
One of the things is that in the 80s we passed 100 percent, all 100 senators voted for a bill on drugs and how to deal with drugs, it was a mistake. Ive been trying to change since then particularly the portion on cocaine. Thats why Ive been arguing that in fact we should not send anyone to jail for a pure drug offense, they should be going into treatment across the board, thats what we should be spending money. And thats why I set up drug courts which were never funded by our Republican friends. They should not be going to jail for a drug or an alcohol problem, they should be going into treatment. Thats what weve been trying to do, thats what Im going to get done because I think the American people have now seen that in fact it was a mistake to pass those laws relating to drugs, but they were not in the Crime Bill.

Kristen Welker: (11:04)
[crosstalk 00:11:04].

Donald Trump: (11:04)
But, why didnt he get it done? See, its all talk, no action with these politicians, why didnt he get it? Thats what Im going to do when I become president. You were vice president along with Obama as your president, your leader, for eight years, why didnt you get it done? You had eight years to get it done, now youre saying youre going to get it done because youre all talking and no action, Joe.

Kristen Welker: (11:25)
Your response.

Joe Biden: (11:25)
We got a lot of it done. We released 38,000-

Donald Trump: (11:27)
You didnt get anything done.

Joe Biden: (11:28)
We got 38,000 prisoners [ crosstalk 00:11:30]-

Donald Trump: (11:30)
You got nothing done.

Joe Biden: (11:31)
38,000 prisoners were released from federal prison, we have There were over a thousand people who were given clemency. [inaudible 00:03:38]. In fact, were the ones that put in the legislation saying we could look at pattern and practice of police departments and what they were doing, how theyre conducting themselves. I could go on, but we began the process, we lost an election, thats why Im running to win back that election and change his terrible policy.

Donald Trump: (11:57)
I just have-

Kristen Welker: (11:57)
Your response and then were going to move on to climate change.

Donald Trump: (11:58)
 one question, why didnt you do it in the eight years, a short time ago? Why didnt you do it? You just said, Im going to do that, Im going to do this. You put tens of thousands of mostly Black young men in prison, now youre saying youre going to get Youre going to undo that, why didnt you get it done? You had eight years with Obama. You know why, Joe? Because youre all talk and no action.

Joe Biden: (12:22)
[crosstalk 00:00:12:23].

Kristen Welker: (12:22)
All right, Vice President Biden, and then were going to move on to the next section.

Joe Biden: (12:25)
We had a Republican Congress, thats the answer.

Kristen Welker: (12:31)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (12:32)
Well, you got to talk them into it, Joe, sometimes you got to talk them into it.

Kristen Welker: (12:35)
Were going to move on to our next section which is climate change.

Donald Trump: (12:37)
 like I did with criminal justice reform, I had to talk Democrats into it.

Joe Biden: (12:41)
You did what we already had done.

Kristen Welker: (12:41)
Gentlemen, were running out of time so we got to get onto climate change, please. You both have very different visions on climate change. President Trump, you say that environmental regulations have hurt jobs in the energy sector, Vice President Biden, you have said you see addressing climate change as an opportunity to create new jobs. For each of you, how would you both combat climate change and support job growth at the same time? Starting with you, President Trump, you have two minutes uninterrupted.

Donald Trump: (13:08)
So, we have the trillion trees program, we have so many different programs, I do love the environment, but what I want is that cleanest crystal clear water, the cleanest air. We have the best lowest number in carbon emissions, which is a big standard that I noticed Obama goes with all the time, not Joe, I havent heard Joe use the term because Im not sure he knows what it represents or means, but I have heard Obama use it. And we have the best carbon emission numbers that weve had in 35 years under this administration, we are working so well with industry, but heres what we cant do. Look at China, how filthy it is, look at Russia, look at India, its filthy, the air is filthy. The [Paris Accord 00:00:13:55], I took us out because we were going to have to spend trillions of dollars and we were treated very unfairly.

Donald Trump: (14:03)
When they put us in there, they did us a great disservice, they were going to take away our businesses. I will not sacrifice tens of millions of jobs, thousands and thousands of companies because of the Paris Accord, it was so unfair. China doesnt kick in until 2030, Russia goes back to a low standard, and we kicked in right away, it would have been It would have destroyed our businesses. So, you ready? We have done an incredible job environmentally, we have the cleanest air, the cleanest water, and the best carbon emission standards that weve seen in many, many years.

Kristen Welker: (14:41)
Vice President Biden-

Donald Trump: (14:41)
And we havent destroyed our industries.

Kristen Welker: (14:44)
Vice President Biden, two minutes to you uninterrupted.

Joe Biden: (14:47)
Climate change, global warming is an existential threat to humanity. We have a moral obligation to deal with it. And were told by all the leading scientists in the world we dont have much time, were going to pass the point of no return within the next 8 to 10 years. Four more years of this man eliminating all the regulations that were put in by us to clean up the climate, to clean up To limit the emissions, will put us in a position where were going to be in real trouble. Heres where we have a great opportunity. I was able to get both all the environmental organizations as well as the labor, the people worried about jobs, to support my climate plan.

Joe Biden: (15:32)
Because what it does, it will create millions of new good paying jobs, were going to invest in, for example, 500,000 Excuse me, 50,000 charging stations on our highways so that we can own the electric car market of the future. In the meantime, China is doing that. Were going to be in a position where were going to see to it that were going to take 4 million existing buildings and 2 million existing homes and retrofit them so they dont leak as much energy, saving hundreds of millions of barrels of

Joe Biden: (16:03)
So they dont leak as much energy saving hundreds of millions of barrels of oil in the process and creating significant number of jobs. By the way, the whole idea of what this is all going to do, its going to create millions of jobs and its going to clean the environment. Our health and our jobs are at stake. Thats whats happening and what right now, by the way, Wall Street firms indicated that my plan, my plan will in fact, create 18.6 million jobs, 7 million more than his. This is from Wall Street and Ill create $1 trillion more in economic growth than his proposal does. Not on climate, just on economy.

Kristen Welker: (16:41)
President Trump, your response.

Donald Trump: (16:42)
They came out and said very strongly $6,500 will be taken away from families under his plan, that his plan is an economic disaster. If you look at what he wants to do, if you look at his plan, his-

Joe Biden: (16:56)
[crosstalk 00:16:56].

Donald Trump: (16:57)
 his environmental plan, do you know developed it? AOC plus three, they know nothing about the climate. I mean, shes got a good line of stuff, but she knows nothing about the climate and theyre all hopping through hoops for AOC plus three. Look, their real plan cost a hundred trillion dollars. If we had the best year in the history of our country for a hundred years, we would not even come close to a number like that. When he says buildings, they want to take buildings down because they want to make bigger windows into smaller windows. As far as theyre concerned, if you had no window, it would be a lovely thing.

Donald Trump: (17:32)
This is the craziest plan that anybody has ever seen and this wasnt done by smart people. This wasnt done by anybody. Frankly, I dont even know how it can be good politically. They want to spend a hundred trillion dollars. Thats their real number. Hes trying to say it was six. Its a hundred trillion dollars. They want to knock down buildings and build new buildings with little, tiny, small windows and many other things-

Kristen Welker: (17:57)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (17:57)
And many other things. And many other things.

Kristen Welker: (17:58)
Okay, let me have the vice-president respond.

Donald Trump: (17:58)
It is crazy.

Kristen Welker: (17:59)
Were running out of time and we have a lot more questions to get back to.

Donald Trump: (18:01)
Youll destroy our country.

Kristen Welker: (18:02)
So lets hear from the vice president. I have a number of more question..

Joe Biden: (18:07)
I dont know where he comes from. I dont know where he comes up with these numbers.

Kristen Welker: (18:09)
Queens.

Joe Biden: (18:09)
A hundred trillion dollars, give me a break. This plan has been endorsed by every major, every major environmental group and every labor group, labor, because they know the future lies. The future lies in us being able to breathe and they know theyre good jobs and getting us there.

Joe Biden: (18:29)
By the way, the fastest growing industry in America is the electric, excuse me, solar energy and wind. He thinks wind causes cancer, windmills. Its the fastest growing jobs and they pay good prevailing wages, 45, 50 bucks an hour. We can grow and we can be cleaner if we go the route Im proposing.

Kristen Welker: (18:54)
Pres

George Stephanopoulos: (00:41)
Hey, and welcome to our town hall with Joe Biden. Mr. Vice President, welcome to you.

Joe Biden: (00:46)
Good to be with you.

George Stephanopoulos: (00:47)
Were here with a group of Pennsylvania voters. You can see theyre all appropriately socially distanced tonight. And there are a group of, some are voting for you, some have said theyre voting for president Trump, some are still undecided, and were going to try to take questions from as many of them as we can tonight.

Joe Biden: (01:02)
Okay.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:02)
And were going to start with Nicholas Fed, and hes from Jenkintown, Pennsylvania. Thats close to here, in Philadelphia.

Joe Biden: (01:08)
I know it well.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:09)
Youre a Democrat.

Nicholas Fed: (01:11)
Im a Democrat. Thank you, George. Mr. Vice President, every day, my wife and I are in disbelief at the lack of coordinated federal action on COVID-19. We know that your administration would follow the science. My question for you, its two parts. First, looking backwards to when this country first became aware of COVID-19, what would following the science have meant in terms of actual policy? And then, looking forward, what would your administration do in terms of following the science with real concrete policies that havent been done by the current administration?

Joe Biden: (01:55)
Well, first of all, going back, the fact is that the president was informed how dangerous this virus was. And all the way back in the beginning of February, I argued that we should be keeping people in China. And we had set up, in our administration, a pandemic office within the White House. There were 44 people on the ground.

Joe Biden: (02:16)
I suggested that we should be seeking, and I didnt hold public office, I was a former Vice President, we in fact asked to have access to the source of the problem. And the best of our knowledge, Trump never pushed that. All those 44 people came home, never got replaced. In addition to that, I pointed out that I thought in February, I did a piece for USA Today saying, This is a serious problem. Trump denied it. He said it wasnt.

Joe Biden: (02:42)
We later learned that he knew full well how serious it was when he did an interview with George Woodward. I mean, excuse me, Bob Woodward. And at the time, he said he didnt tell anybody because he was afraid Americans would panic. Americans dont panic, he panicked. He didnt say a word to anybody.

Joe Biden: (02:58)
Then I wrote a piece in March about what I thought we should be doing to take hold of this, using the Theres an act that passed a long time ago that allows the president to go into a business and say, Stop making this, and start making that. And it took a long time for him to even institute that, to get ventilators and so on. And so, the point was he missed enormous opportunities and kept saying things that werent true. Its going to go away by Easter, dont worry about it. When the summer comes, its all going to go away like a miracle. Hes still saying those things.

George Stephanopoulos: (03:31)
Before you go to the future, can I follow up on the, Im looking backwards. just a little bit? You did have an op-ed in January where you warned of the seriousness of the pandemic, but theres no record of you calling for social distancing, limited social gatherings, mandatory mask-

Joe Biden: (03:47)
Not back then.

George Stephanopoulos: (03:47)
In January, February.

Joe Biden: (03:49)
Not in January, February. No, thats correct, there wasnt. That came at the end of March. And then I laid out a detailed plan relative to school openings in June and July. By that time, the science was becoming clearer and clearer of how this was spreading so rapidly. But the president kept denying that. If you notice, from March on, I stopped doing big meetings, I started wearing masks.

Joe Biden: (04:13)
So, it was at a time when the science was saying, and his key people, Dr. Fauci were saying, You should be taking these precautions. So, what we should be doing now, there should be a national standard. Instead of leaving this up to, remember what the president said to the governors, Well, theyre on their own, its not my responsibility. The governors can do what they need to do, not my responsibility. It is a presidential responsibility to lead, and he didnt do that.

Joe Biden: (04:37)
He didnt talk about what needed to be done because he kept worrying, in my view, about the stock market. He worried if he talked about how bad this could be, unless we took these precautionary actions, then in fact, the market would go down. And his barometer of success to the economy is the market.

Joe Biden: (04:56)
Thirdly, what we didnt do is, the president had an opportunity to open and allow schools and businesses to stay open if they got the kind of help they needed. So, the Congress passed a couple of trillion dollars worth of help. And what happened was most of that money, a significant portion of that money went to the very wealthiest corporations in the country, didnt get to the mom and pop stores.

Joe Biden: (05:20)
So, you had one in five, one in six minority businesses closing. Many of them permanently. People being laid off. And then what happened was, when the first round of money for unemployment, enhanced unemployment went by, he didnt do anything. He didnt do anything. And to the best of my knowledge, and I mean this sincerely, I cant think of, Ive been around for a lot of presidents, and you know a lot of presidents in a crisis, I dont ever remember one never calling the House and Senate Republicans, Democrats together.

George Stephanopoulos: (05:52)
Lets look forward a little bit. You said that you would lock down the economy, only if the scientists said it was necessary.

Joe Biden: (05:56)
By the way, in the context, would I lock down the economy if science said so? I said Id follow science. But I dont think theres a need to lock down.

George Stephanopoulos: (06:05)
Yeah, but I want to press you on that point. Youve been in the Oval Office for eight years with President Obama, he would always say that only the hard to solve problems-

Joe Biden: (06:15)
[crosstalk 00:06:15] Get there.

George Stephanopoulos: (06:15)
What is most likely to happen is, the scientists will disagree. The scientists will disagree with the economist. So the question is, how are you going to decide this? Who are you going to listen to? And how can you can contain the pandemic without crushing the economy?

Joe Biden: (06:28)
Well, you can contain the pandemic by being rational and not crush economy. For example, I laid out a plan, how you can open businesses. You can open businesses and schools, if in fact you provide them the guidance that they need, as well as the money to be able to do it. Whats happening now is, we know, for example, if you can open a business and you could have a sign on the door saying, Safe to come in. And thats why people arent going anyway, when theyre open.

Joe Biden: (06:52)
And say, because you have social distancing, you have plastic barriers, when you go to the cashier, you have separators between the booths. You dont have large crowds, you reduce the size, the number of people you can have in the restaurant. You make sure theres testing, thats a really critical piece that he didnt do testing and tracing. And you make sure that people are equipped, going to schools.

Joe Biden: (07:15)
You know, we initially said, the government initially said, theyre going to provide masks for every student and every teacher. Then they said, No, no, no, no. FEMA said, the president or whomever said, No, no, no. Thats not a national emergency, not a national emergency.

Joe Biden: (07:33)
We need more teachers in our schools to be able to open smaller pods. We need ventilation systems change. Theres a lot of things we know now, and I laid them out in some detail. Now again, when I say I laid them out, Im not an office holder. Im running for office. Its not like Im still Vice President, or I wasnt a United States Senator pushing this.

Joe Biden: (07:52)
So, I dont want to say, I, I, I. But we did lay out exactly what needed to be done. And take a look, we make up 4% of the worlds population. We have 20% of the worlds deaths. Were in a situation where we have 210 plus thousand people dead. And whats he doing? Nothing. Hes still not wearing masks, and so on.

George Stephanopoulos: (08:12)
Were getting some other questions on COVID.

Joe Biden: (08:14)
Sure.

George Stephanopoulos: (08:14)
The next one comes from Kelly Lee. Shes from Philadelphia.

Joe Biden: (08:16)
Thank you.

George Stephanopoulos: (08:17)
Republican. Voted for Donald Trump in 2016.

Kelly Lee: (08:21)
I did.

George Stephanopoulos: (08:21)
Undecided now.

Joe Biden: (08:22)
Hey, Kelly. How are you?

Kelly Lee: (08:23)
Hi, Mr. Biden. My question is about the coronavirus vaccine, or potential.

Joe Biden: (08:29)
Yes.

Kelly Lee: (08:29)
Senator Harris stated that she absolutely would not take a vaccine from President Trump. And of course, we all know its not President Trump that would create this vaccine. It would be doctors and scientists that presumably we all trust. So, my question for you is if a vaccine were approved between now and the end of the year, would you take it? And if you were to become president, would you mandate that everyone has to take it?

Joe Biden: (08:58)
Two things. Number one, President Trump talks about things that just arent accurate, about everything from vaccines, were going to have one right away, is it going to happen, and so on. The point is that, if the scientists, if the body of scientists say that this is what is ready to be done, and its been tested, theyve gone through the three phases. Yes, I would take it. Id encourage people to take it.

Joe Biden: (09:23)
But President Trump says things like, everything from this crazy stuff hes walking away from now, inject bleach in your arm, and thats going to work. Im not being facetious, hes actually said these things. And now, Regeneron is the answer. Thats going to cure everything. Theres 500,000 doses, we have more than a few million people, you know? And so, if you noticed, most of the companies who are developing these vaccines are working, theyre making real progress.

Joe Biden: (09:53)
I meet with four leading scientists, at least twice a week. In the beginning, four times a week, giving us the detail on what kind of progress is being made. And right now, they do the right thing. When they run into a serious problem, they halt the test. They dont continue until they figure out what the problem was. Theyre not there yet.

Joe Biden: (10:11)
And the most scientists say, that its not likely to have a vaccine that would be available until the beginning of next year, into the spring of next year. And in the meantime, what I worry about is the same thing with Regeneron, which is a useful antidote. Not antidote, a useful tool. But whats happening is there was no plan to figure out how to distribute it. We have 500,000 vials of it.

Joe Biden: (10:41)
Well, we dont have all the testing equipment. We dont have all the ability to get it to the people who need it. And what we should be doing now, and allegedly its happening, but Ive not seen it yet nor the docs that Ive talked to seen it. There should be a plan when we have the vaccine, how do we distribute it?

George Stephanopoulos: (10:57)
And once we get it, if its safe, if its effective, will you mandate its use?

Joe Biden: (11:02)
The answer is, depending on how clear Vaccines, they say, have a very positive impact and that youre going to affect positively 85% of the American public. Or theres others say, This vaccine is really the key. This is the golden key. It depends on the state of the nature of the vaccine when it comes out, and how its being distributed. But I would think that we should be talking about, depending on the continuation of the spread of the virus, we should be thinking about making it mandatory.

George Stephanopoulos: (11:38)
How would you enforce that?

Joe Biden: (11:40)
Well, you couldnt, thats the problem. Just like you cant enforce measles, you cant come to school unless you have a measles shot. You know, you cant. But you cant say, everyone has to do this, just like you cant mandate a mask. But you can say, you can go to every governor and get them all in a room, all 50 of them as president and say,  Ask people to wear the mask. Everybody knows.

George Stephanopoulos: (12:03)
And if they dont? Fines?

Joe Biden: (12:03)
And if they dont, no. Not fine. Then I go to every governor, I go to every mayor, I go to every councilmen, and I go to every local official, say, Mandate the mask. Say, This is what you have to do when youre out. Make sure you encourage it being done. Look, George, you and I know, and I think you do too as well, the words of a president matter.

Kelly Lee: (12:25)
Absolutely.

Joe Biden: (12:25)
No matter whether theyre good, bad, or indifferent, they matter. And when a president doesnt wear a mask or makes fun of folks like me, when I was wearing a mask for a long time, then people say, Well, it mustnt be that important. But when a president says, I think this is very important. For example, I walked in here with this mask, but I have one of the N95 masks underneath it. I left it in my dressing room. Not the dresser, the room I was in before I got here.

Joe Biden: (12:53)
And so, I think it matters what we say. And were now learning that children are getting the virus, not with as serious consequences, but theres been no studies done yet on vaccines for children. So, theres a long way to go, but we can make progress in the meantime and save lives.

Joe Biden: (13:13)
And the last point Ill make, if you listen to the head of the CDC, he stood up and he said, You know, while were waiting for a vaccine. He held up a mask. You wear this mask, youll save more lives between now and the end of the year than if we had a vaccine. Its estimated by every major study done from the University of Washington to Columbia, that if in fact we wore masks, we could save, between now and the end of the year, a hundred thousand lives.

George Stephanopoulos: (13:44)
And avoid lock downs?

Joe Biden: (13:45)
And avoid lockdown, yes. You dont have to lock down if youre wearing the mask.

George Stephanopoulos: (13:49)
Lets get a question on the economy. Anthony Archer-

Joe Biden: (13:51)
Thank you, I hope I answered your question.

George Stephanopoulos: (13:53)
 from Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, its a suburb of Pittsburgh. Republican.

Joe Biden: (13:56)
I know it.

George Stephanopoulos: (13:56)
Voted for President Trump.

Anthony Archer: (13:58)
Thank you, George. Thank you, Mr. Vice President. You stated that anyone making less than $400,000 will not see one single penny of their taxes raised.

Joe Biden: (14:07)
Thats right.

Anthony Archer: (14:07)
But also, state that you are going to eliminate the Trump tax cuts. The Trump tax cuts reduces taxes for the majority of workers. I would argue, not enough. What is your plan for either extending the tax cuts for the middle-class, or creating a new plan that further reduces those taxes?

Joe Biden: (14:22)
I carry this card with me. When I said the Trump tax cuts, about 1.3 trillion of the $2 trillion in his tax cuts went to the top one 10th of 1%. Thats what Im talking about eliminating, not all the tax cuts that are out there. And by the way, if you take a look, we reduced the corporate tax rate from 35%. and Democrats, Republicans who were in office thought it should come down to 28%. He reduced it to 21%.

Joe Biden: (14:54)
You have 91 out of the Fortune 500 companies not paying a single solitary penny. If you raise the corporate tax back to 28%, which is a fair tax, youd raise one trillion, three hundred billion dollars by that one act. If you made sure that people making over 400 grand paid what they did in the Bush administration, 39.6%, you would raise another, it goes up to let me get you the exact number here, about another 200, excuse me. $92 billion.

Joe Biden: (15:29)
So, you could raise a lot of money to be able to invest in things that can make your life easier. Make you change your standard of living by making sure you have affordable health care, by making sure youre in a situation where youre able to send your kid to school. If you have student debt, you can deal with it. Making sure that your home, you can pay your mortgage. You got 20 million people, right now.

George Stephanopoulos: (15:50)
Mr. Vice President, let me press you on that though.

Joe Biden: (15:52)
Sure.

George Stephanopoulos: (15:52)
Youre going to raise the corporate tax, youre going to raise taxes on the wealthy. Is it wise to do even that when the economy is as weak as it is right now?

Joe Biden: (15:59)
Absolutely.

George Stephanopoulos: (16:00)
Another 900,000 people have filed for unemployment.

Joe Biden: (16:02)
Thats a great question. Moodys did analysis of my detailed analysis of my tax plan and my economic plan. They said, I will, in four years, Moodys Wall Street, said I will create 18.6 million new jobs, good paying jobs, number one. Number two, the GDP will grow by a trillion dollars more than would under Trump, and 7 million more jobs than under Trump.

Joe Biden: (16:31)
And the reason is, when you allow people to get back in the game and have a job, everything moves. Everything moves. Right now, you got the opposite. You had, last year during this pandemic, you had the wealthiest billionaires in the world, in the nation, they made another $700 billion. $700 billion. He talks about a V-shape recovery. Its a K shape recovery. If youre on the top, youre going to do very well. And if youre in the bottom, or youre in the middle or the bottom, your income is coming down. Youre not getting a raise.

Joe Biden: (17:09)
I shouldnt, I dont know what you do. You may get a raise. Hope youre a billionaire. But all kidding aside, its about growing the economy. And George, the way out, the reason why Im so optimistic about economic recovery, more than Ive ever been, is we have these four crises happening all at once. And one helps the other. For example, were going to invest a great deal of that money into infrastructure, and to a green infrastructure.

Joe Biden: (17:38)
Were going to put 500,000 charging stations on new highways were building, and all highways were building. Were going to own the electric market. You know as well as I do from your days, you know, in the old days, where the president spends about $600 billion a year on government contracts. Everything from making sure they have aircraft carriers, to automobile fleets in the United States.

Joe Biden: (18:04)
If you make, and its not in violation of any international trade agreement, made in America. If you actually insist that whatever that product is, made in America, including the material that goes into the product. It is estimated were going to create somewhere between another four and six million jobs just by doing that.

Joe Biden: (18:24)
But whats happening now under his trade policy, a lot of this is going overseas. You get a benefit from going overseas, if you have much of it being made overseas. So, if you send it overseas, you get a 10% tax increase on a product. If you make it in America and you bring it back, you get a 10% growth. If you bring back a company, and youre going to open up an old facility, you get a 10% tax credit for all you invested. That actually works, George.

George Stephanopoulos: (18:53)
So, theres not going to be any delay on the tax increases?

Joe Biden: (18:56)
No, well. I got to get the votes. I got to get the votes. Thats why, the one thing, I have this strange notion. We are a democracy. Some of my Republican friends and some of my Democratic friends, even occasionally say, Well, if you cant get the votes by executive order, youre going to do something. Things you cant do by executive order, unless youre a dictator. Were democracy, we need consensus.

George Stephanopoulos: (19:20)
Got to take a quick break. Well be right back.

Joe Biden: (19:22)
I hope I answered your question.

Voice Over: (19:24)
We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America. This special edition of 2020 will return in a moment.

Voice Over: (23:25)
(silence) The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude. From the Constitution Center in Philadelphia here again, George Stephanopoulos.

George Stephanopoulos: (23:46)
And welcome back to our town hall with Joe Biden. Were going to get a question now from Cedric Humphrey. Hes a student from Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. Progressive Democrat.

Joe Biden: (23:53)
Dont jump, Cedric. Youre look like youre way up there.

Cedric Humphrey: (23:56)
Ill be okay. Thank you, George. And good evening, former Vice President Biden.

Joe Biden: (23:59)
Good evening.

Cedric Humphrey: (24:00)
Many people believe that the true swing demographic in this election will be-

Cedric Humphrey: (24:03)
Many people believe that the true swing demographic in this election will be Black voters under the age of 30, not because theyll be voting for Trump, but because they wont vote at all. I myself have had this exact same conflict. So my question for you then is, besides You aint Black, what do you have to say to young Black voters who see voting for you as further participation in a system that continually fails to protect them?

Joe Biden: (24:24)
Well, Id say first of all, as my buddy John Lewis said, Its a sacred opportunity, the right to vote. You can make a difference. If young Black women and men vote, you can determine the outcome of this election. Not a joke. You can do that. Then the next question is, am I worthy of your vote? Can I earn your vote? And the answer is, theres two things I think that I care and Ive demonstrated I care about my whole career. One is, in addition to dealing with a criminal justice system to make it fairer and make it more decent, we have to be able to put Black Americans in a position to be able to gain wealth, generate wealth. And so you look at what that entails.

Joe Biden: (25:02)
It entails everything from early education, thats why Im supporting making sure that Title One schools, as you know, schools with the least tax base to be able to support their schools, I increased the funding from them from $15 to $45 billion. That allows every teacher in that school to make up to 60,000 bucks, and the problem now is theyre leaving the schools. Theyre not there. Were short about a million and a half teachers, a million and a quarter teachers.

Joe Biden: (25:29)
Number two, every three and four and five-year-old will go to school, school, not daycare, school, and with all the great universities, including the one youve gone to, go to, or went to, in fact, talks about in the last eight years, whats happened. What happens when you let them go to school? They make up rapidly whatever shortcoming they had in terms of their education prior to that. They have not heard as many words spoken, et cetera, et cetera. What happens is that, the studies show, that 58% will increase by 58% their chance of going all through 12 years of school, and going through successfully. It will also provide for the ability to bring in social workers and school psychologists. We have one school psychologist in America now for every 1,507 kids. It should be one to 500, not just in schools that are poor, but in all schools, because we learned that, for example, drug abuse doesnt cause mental illness, mental illness causes drug abuse, the failure to get hold of people and deal with their anxieties.

Joe Biden: (26:34)
In addition to that, I provide for a $70 billion for HBC use for them to be able to have the wherewithal to do what other universities can do, because they dont have the kind of foundational support they need. And so that would allow them, for example, like we did in our administration, the President allowed me to go down and we awarded a cybersecurity laboratory, ability to compete for cybersecurity laboratory. The federal government spends billions of dollars a year on universities, because there are the best kept secret and where most of the major inventions come out of. And so that school now will be able to produce young Black women and men who are going to go into a field of the future thats burgeoning, cybersecurity. And thats what is going to help a great deal.

Joe Biden: (27:18)
In addition to that, if youre a young man about to graduate and you graduated from school and you want to own your first home, well, its awful hard to get the money, depending on the background, where your economic background is, to get a down payments. So were going to guarantee first term home buyers a $15,000 down payment for first term home buyers. In addition to that, all the studies now show, and Ive been arguing this for a long time, is young Black entrepreneurs are just as successful as White entrepreneurs or anyone else given a shot. But you cant get the money. Where do you go to get the startup money? So what President Obama and I did, we had a program where we took $1.5 billion and we invested it in all the SBAs around the country, and the state SBAs, small business associations, and that generated $30 billion came off the sideline.

Joe Biden: (28:11)
Because if you have a guarantee of $200,000 for your new startup enterprise, a young entrepreneur, youre going to be able to attract, if its government money and its a guarantee, you could be able to attract another $100,000. It generated $30 billion. Well, Im changing that program and Ill get this done without much trouble I believe in the Congress from $1.5 million to $30 billion. Thatll take $300 billion off the sideline and grow. And, for example, if you, in fact, and I were the same age and we split our differences, if we were the same age, and we went to the same builder to buy us each the same home, but my home was in a White neighborhood on one side of a highway, and yours is in a Black neighborhood, same exact home, your home will start off being valued 29% less than my home. Yet your insurance for that home will be higher. Youll be taxed more for it. Weve got to end this. Thats what got me involved in politics in the first place, a thing called red lining.

Joe Biden: (29:15)
We can change so much that we can do so much to change the circumstances to give people a real opportunity.

George Stephanopoulus: (29:22)
Cedric. Is that right? Did you hear what you needed here?

Cedric Humphrey: (29:27)
I think so.

Joe Biden: (29:29)
Well, theres a lot more if youre going to hang around afterwards. Ill tell you more.

Cedric Humphrey: (29:32)
Okay.

Joe Biden: (29:33)
No, but I really mean it. Its the key. Look, this is the way every other  Like my dad, he lost his job up in Scranton and it took him three years to be able to move down to Delaware, to Claymont, Delaware, a little steel town, and send us home to our grandpop to live with him. We finally got back. We lived in an apartment, which became six and eight housing much later. It was just normal apartments. But it took him five years to be able to buy a home. Well, we bought a three bedroom home with four kids and a grandpop living with us, but it accumulated wealth. You built up wealth. Thats how middle-class folks make it. They build up wealth. Then he was able to borrow a little against that to be able to help us get the school, those kinds of things. Its about accumulating wealth and youre behind an eight ball. The vast majority of people of color are behind an eight ball.

Joe Biden: (30:24)
And its the same way whats going on now with all this money thats been voted. Whats happened? You go to the bank, if youre a Black businessman, and the President fired the only Inspector General to see oversee all this help coming from the Congress. And what happens? You go in and they say, Ah, do you have an account here? No. Do you have a credit card? No. Have you borrowed from us before ? No. We bailed these suckers out. Theyre not liable for any of the money, but they still wont lend it to you. Weve got to change that. Its about accumulating wealth.

George Stephanopoulus: (30:57)
I want to get another question in here from Angelica Politarhos.

Joe Biden: (30:59)
Im sorry.

George Stephanopoulus: (31:00)
No, not at all. Garnet Valley, Pennsylvania.

Angelia Politarhos: (31:02)
Hi.

George Stephanopoulus: (31:02)
Republican who voted for President Trump last time.

Angelia Politarhos: (31:05)
Thank you. Thank you, George. Thank you, Vice President Biden. Nice to meet you. Whats your view on the Crime Bill that you wrote 1994, which showed prejudice against minorities? Where do you stand today on that?

Joe Biden: (31:17)
Well, first of all, things have changed drastically. That Crime Bill, when it voted, the Black Caucus voted for it. Every Black mayor supported it across the board and the Crime Bill itself did not have mandatory sentences except for two things. It had three strikes and youre out, which I voted against, in the Crime Bill, but it had a lot of other things in it that turned out to be both bad and good. I wrote the Violence Against Women Act. That was part of the assault weapons ban and other things that were good. What I was against was giving states more money for prison systems that they could build, state prison systems. And you have 93 out of every 100 people in jail now is in a state prison, not in a federal prison, because they built more prisons.

Joe Biden: (31:58)
I also wrote into that bill a thing called drug courts. I dont believe anybody should be going to jail for drug use. They should be going into mandatory rehabilitation. We should be building rehab centers to have these people housed. We should decriminalize marijuana, wipe out the record so you can actually say honesty, You ever been arrested for murder for anything? You can say no, because were going to pass a law saying there is no background that you have to reveal relative to the use of marijuana. And so theres a lot of things. But in addition to that, weve got to change the system. I joined with a group of people in the House to provide for changing the system from punishment to rehabilitation. Along with a guy named Marlon Specter, who you may remember, I wrote the Second Chance Act.

George Stephanopoulus: (32:49)
In the meantime, an awful lot of people were jailed for minor drug crimes after the Crime Bill.

Joe Biden: (32:53)
Right.

George Stephanopoulus: (32:54)
Was it a mistake to support it?

Joe Biden: (32:55)
Yes, it was. But heres where the mistake. The mistake came in terms of what the states did locally. What we did federally, we said, you remember, George, it was all about the same time for the same crime. What I had done as the Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, I took the 10 Circuit Courts of Appeals, took some really brilliant lawyers working for me in Judiciary, we did a study and we determined what happens if, for the first, second, third offense for any crime in the criminal justice system at the federal level, if youre a Black man and its the first time youve committed robbery, how long would you go to jail? On average? If youre White man, how long? The Black man would go to jail on average 13 years. White man, two years. Id go down the list of every single crime.

Joe Biden: (33:42)
So we set up a sentencing commission. We didnt set the time. Every single solitary maximum was reduced in there. But what happened was it became the same time for the same crime. So it said, You have to serve between one and three years. And it ended up becoming much lower, Black folks went to jail a lot less than they would have before. But it was a mistake.

George Stephanopoulus: (34:05)
Let me ask another follow-up on the Crime bill. It also funded 100,000 police back in 1994. Youve often said that more cops clearly mean less crime. Do you still believe that?

Joe Biden: (34:15)
Yes, if in fact theyre involved in community policing, not jump squads. For example, when we had community policing, from the mid-90s on until till Bush got elected, what happened? Violent crime actually went down precipitous. Remember the significant rise in violent crime that was occurring in the late 80s into the 90s. It went down and fewer African Americans were arrested because you had the requirement. The cops didnt like it. They didnt like the community policing, because you had to have two people in the vehicle, they had to get out of their cars, they had to introduce themselves to who own the local liquor store, who owned the local grocery store, who was the woman on the corner. And what they would do, George, theyd actually go and give people their phone numbers. A cop would give the phone number.

Joe Biden: (35:02)
So if Nelly Smith was on the second floor where drug deals took place and things happened below her apartment, she could call and say, Its Millie, and theres something going on here. And theyd never revealed it was her, because theyd know, if she knew that, in fact, they report, theyd never report the crime, shed never report. So it actually started to come down. And what happened? They eliminated the funding for community policing. Community policing doesnt mean more people coming in, in armored Humvees and swarming. It turned out that by the time we got to the late 90s and crime had come down so much, the mayors and everybody asked the question, Where do you want me to spend the money? They say, Well, only 1% thought violent crime was a problem. It was as high as 22%.

George Stephanopoulus: (35:48)
Right now we have a systemic problem. How do you get the kind of policing, prevent the kind of policing [crosstalk 00:35:55].

Joe Biden: (35:53)
You have to change the way in which they [inaudible 00:35:55]. One of the things Im going to do, George, is what is set up a national study group made up of cops, social workers, as well as made up of the Black community and the Brown community to sit down in the White House and over the next year come up with significant reforms that need to take place within communities. You have to bring them together. One of the things Ive observed is, the neighborhood I grew up, I grew up in Claymont, you either became a cop, a firefighter, or a priest. I wasnt qualified much to do any one of them, but heres the deal, all kidding aside. Most cops dont like bad cops.

Angelia Politarhos: (36:34)
Correct.

Joe Biden: (36:34)
They dont like it.

Angelia Politarhos: (36:35)
Thats correct.

Joe Biden: (36:36)
And so what happens is they get intimidated into not reporting. So one of the things we do is there has to be transparency available. We have to be able to go in at the federal level, be able to go in and check out whether or not theres systematic problems within police departments. If, in fact, a cop needs to be tried, its not the prosecutor in the community, in the district there. Youve got to go outside the community to get another prosecutor to come in to handle the crime. Theres a lot of things weve learned, and it takes time but we can do this. You can ban choke holds, but beyond that, you have to teach people how to de-escalate circumstances. De-escalate. So instead of anybody coming at you and the first thing you do is shoot to kill, you shoot them in the leg. Theres ways you have to do more background checks in terms of whether or not the person coming in, passes a certain psychological test.

Joe Biden: (37:29)
And the last thing Ill say, and Im sorry, but its really, I think, really, really important, is you have to be in a position where you are able to identify, identify the things that have to change. And one of the things that has to change is so many cops get called into circumstances where somebody is mentally off. Like what happened not long ago, that guy with the knife. Thats why we have to provide within police departments psychologists and social workers to go out with the cops on those calls, some of those 911 calls to de-escalate the circumstance, to deal with talking them down. But cops are kind of like school teachers now. A school teacher has to know everything from how to handle hunger in a household as well as how to teach how to read. Well, cops or dont have that breadth, and theres a lot of things we can do. We shouldnt be defunding cops. We should be mandating the things that we should be doing within police departments and make sure theres total transparency.

George Stephanopoulus: (38:34)
Got to take another quick break. Well be right back.

Joe Biden: (38:36)
I dont know the answer to your question.

Speaker 1: (43:09)
He shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Judges of the Supreme Court, and all other officers of the United States. From the Constitution Center in Philadelphia, here again, George Stephanopoulos.

George Stephanopoulus: (43:28)
And the Supreme Court is our next topic. The questioner, Nathan Osburn of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Democrat.

Nathan Osburn: (43:35)
Hi, Im George and Mr. Vice President.

Joe Biden: (43:36)
Hey, Nathan.

Nathan Osburn: (43:38)
Our countrys first Supreme Court gave its first ruling is just two blocks from here from 1791 to 1800, and its become more polarized since then. Merrick Garland didnt get a hearing for all of 2016 and Amy Coney Barrett is being pushed through at the last minute, even though millions have already voted. So what do you think about ideas from people like Pete Buttigieg and others to put in place safeguards that will help ensure more long-term balance and stability? And what do you say to LGBTQ Americans and others who are very worried right now about erosions of their rights and our democracy as a whole?

Joe Biden: (44:13)
Well, let me start at the last point and work my way back. I think theres great reason to be concerned. I was on the road most of the time during these hearings so I didnt hear many of them. I just got the recaps when Id get in late at night. Im been going around the country, Florida, anyway, but my reading online what the judge said was she didnt answer very many questions at all. And I dont even think she is laid out much of a judicial philosophy in terms of the basis upon which she thinks are there unenumerated rights in the Constitution, nonetheless. So, number one. So I think theres great reason to be concerned for the LGBT community, something I fought very hard for, for a long time to make sure theres equality across the board.

Joe Biden: (45:01)
Number two, I think that also healthcare overall is very much in jeopardy as a consequence of the Presidents going to go directly after this election directly to the Supreme Court within a month to try to get Obamacare wiped out after 10 million people have already lost her insurance from their employer and wants to take 20 million people out of the system as well, plus 100 million people with pre-existing conditions. So theres a lot at stake. I dont think its appropriate. I think the Constitution implies, theres no provision in the Constitution, my problem is I made a mistake of teaching constitutional law for 21 years, and the separation of powers, the Constitution implies that their way the people have a right to determine whos going to be on the court is how they vote for their Senators and their President. We seek the advice and consent of the Senate. And the President-

George Stephanopoulus: (45:52)
The President is President for all four years, isnt he?

Joe Biden: (45:54)
He is. But once an election begins, by implication, it is inconsistent with the constitutional principles, in my view. You get disagreement among scholars on this, but I believe its inconsistent when millions of people have already voted to put someone on the Court. I think it should have been held until this election is over, see what the makeup of the Senate is going to be. If the President wins this election, he should be able to go for it.

George Stephanopoulus: (46:22)
But how about that question of expanding the court? Heres what you said exactly one year ago tonight at a Democratic debate. You said, I would not get into court packing. I would not pack the court. Thats not what youre saying now. Is the nomination of Judge Barrett reason enough to rethink your position?

Joe Biden: (46:36)
What I wanted to do, George, you know if I had answered the question directly then all the focus would be on, whats Biden going to do if he wins? Instead of on, is it appropriate what is going on now? And it should stay. This is the thing that the President loves to do, always take our eye off the ball whats at stake. One of the things Pete has suggested is, and theres a number of constitutional scholars have suggested as well, that there are at least four or five options that are available to determine whether or not you can change the way in which the court lifetime appointment takes place consistent arguably with the Constitution. I have not been a fan of court packing because then it just generates what will happen. Whoever wins, it just keeps moving in a way that is inconsistent with what is going to be manageable.

George Stephanopoulus: (47:25)
So youre still not a fan?

Joe Biden: (47:26)
Well, Im not a fan. It depends on how this turns out. Not how he wins, but how its handled, how its handled. But theres a number of things that are going to be coming up and theres going to be a lot of discussion about other alternative as well.

George Stephanopoulus: (47:40)
What does that mean, how its handled? How will that determine [crosstalk 00:23:42].

Joe Biden: (47:43)
For example, theres actually real live debate on the floor, if people are really going to be able to have a time to go through this. I dont know anybody whos gone on the floor thats been a controversial justice in terms of making fundamentally or altering the makeup of the court thats gone through in a day kind of thing. I mean, it depends on 

Joe Biden: (48:03)
 and the makeup of the court has gone through in a day kind of thing. I mean, it depends on how much they rushed this. And you think about it, George, here you got a lot of people not to be able to pay their mortgage, not being able to put food on the table, not being able to keep their business open, not being able to do anything to deal with whats going on in terms of the economy as a consequence of COVID and they have no time to deal with that, but they have time to rush this through.

George Stephanopoulos: (48:22)
Well, right now it looks like theyre going to have a vote around Halloween. So if they vote on it, [crosstalk 00:48:26] for the election. If they vote on it before the election, you are open to expanding the court?

Joe Biden: (48:31)
Im open to considering what happens from that point on.

George Stephanopoulos: (48:36)
You know, you said so many times during the campaign, all through the course of your career, its important to level with [crosstalk 00:48:41]

Joe Biden: (48:40)
It is. Good choice. No matter what answer I gave you, if I say it, thats the headline tomorrow. It wont be about whats going on now, the improper way theyre proceeding.

George Stephanopoulos: (48:51)
But dont voters have a right to know where you stand?

Joe Biden: (48:52)
They do have a right to know what I stand and theyll have a right to know where I stand before they vote.

George Stephanopoulos: (48:57)
So youll come out with a clear position before election day?

Joe Biden: (48:59)
Yes. Depending on how they handle this. But look, what you should do is you got to make sure you vote and vote for a senator who in fact reflects your general view on constitutional interpretation, and vote for a president who thinks is more in line with you. And if you oppose the position that I would not have appointed her, but if you oppose my position, vote for Trump, vote for Republican who shares that view, but thats your opportunity to get involved in lifetime appointments that have presidents come and go, justices stay and stay and stay.

George Stephanopoulos: (49:36)
You have a question from a Republican, Andrew Lewis. I would guess a disaffected Republican. You cast a write-in vote for John Kasich in 2016. Youre going to vote against President Trump this year.

Joe Biden: (49:46)
Johns writing in for me, by the way.

George Stephanopoulos: (49:48)
I know that.

Joe Biden: (49:51)
Im sorry.

Andrew Lewis: (49:52)
Mr. Vice President, my father Drew Lewis served as secretary of transportation under President Ronald Reagan in his first time.

Joe Biden: (49:58)
Oh yeah, Ill be darned.

Andrew Lewis: (49:59)
And some of his closest allies and friends were Democrats, including House Speaker Tip ONeill and Senator Ted Kennedy. Sadly, today we have highly partisan and dysfunctional governance. And I believe President Trump is primarily responsible for creating this toxic environment. As president, how will you avoid the temptation to exact revenge and instead take the high road and attempt to restore bipartisanship, civility, and honor to our democracy?

Joe Biden: (50:29)
It was written by a fellow who won the Pulitzer prize for a book he wrote about the presidency. He said I doubt whether Biden is really Irish. He doesnt hold a grudge. In politics, grudges dont work. They make no sense. I really mean it. I have never, and the second point Id make is everybody talks about, Yeah, Joe, when you were a senator and a chairman of foreign relations or chairman of judiciary, you got a lot of things done. Youre able to cross the aisle but the days are changed. When youre vice president, you got a lot done, but it cant happen anymore. It can. We got to change the nature of the way we deal with one another. And it starts off by the way your father was and Tip was and others. You dont question another man or womans motive. You can question their judgment, but not their motive. We badly needed an infrastructure bill.

Joe Biden: (51:19)
Well, what happens? I stand up and I say, We need an infrastructure bill, Senator, but I tell you what, youre in the pocket of the cement industry, but lets see what we can do. He cant get anywhere. Nothing happens. Nothing happens. I learned that lesson a long time ago. Ive never, even when its obvious on its face what the motive is, stick to the subject and listen to the other guy. Listen, what I will be doing as, if Im elected president and the first thing and not a joke. And you can ask if theyd tell you, your dads old friends in the Republican side, Im going to pick up the phone and call them and say, Lets get together. Weve got to figure out how were going to move forward here.

Joe Biden: (51:55)
Because theres so many things we really do agree on. And with Trump out of the way, the vindictiveness of a president going after Republicans who dont do exactly what he says gets taken away. Theres going to be, I promise you, between four and eight Republican senators who are going to be willing to move on things where theres bipartisan consensus. Last example Ill give you. After Trump had been elected, named the next president, wasnt sworn in yet, Ive been working on a thing called a bill relating to cancer cures. Okay? And it was called the Cancer Moonshot. And I work with a number of Democrats and Republicans. And we had a bill that was about $9 billion that made significant increases in research and development on cancer alternatives, NIH and particularly specific cancer initiatives. And we only had at the time I think it was 111 or 114, whatever it was, votes in the house. I dont hold any exact number.

Joe Biden: (52:58)
And we had fewer than 40 in the Senate, but after he was elected, I got those people together as vice president and we sat down and we worked it out and we ended up getting a pass 396 votes in the house and 94 votes in the Senate. And at the end of the day, because it had to do with the Biden Cancer Moonshot Ive been working on, Mitch McConnell. Mitch McConnell stood up and I was presiding officer and moved to name the bill after my deceased son, Beau, who had just died. So, there are ways to bring this together.

George Stephanopoulos: (53:33)
But how about the question of political accountability? Is there some tension between that and bringing people together? Robert Mueller laid out a lot of evidence of possible obstruction of justice by President Trump. What would a Biden Justice Department do with that evidence?

Joe Biden: (53:47)
What the Biden Justice Department will do is let the Department of Justice be the Department of Justice. Let them make the judgments of who should be prosecuted. Theyre not my lawyers. Theyre not my personal lawyer.

George Stephanopoulos: (54:01)
So, youre not going to rule it in or rule it out?

Joe Biden: (54:03)
Im not going to rule in or out. Well, Im going to hire really first rate prosecutors and people who understand the law like Democrat and Republican administrations have had, and let them make the judgements, but turning this into a vehicle for your, as if its your own law firm, you dont own that justice department. You pick the best people you can and you hope that what theyre going to do is theyre going to enforce the law as they see it. But can you remember any Republican president going out there or former Democratic president go find that guy and prosecute him? Remember, where you hear that? Or by the way, Im being sued because a woman has accused me of rape. Represent me. Represent me. Personally represent me in the state of New York on my not allowing my tax returns. Whats that all about? What is that about?

George Stephanopoulos: (54:52)
Got to take another break. Well be right back.

Speaker 2: (54:58)
The executive power shall be vested in a president of the United States of America. He shall hold his office during the term of four years and together with the vice president chosen for the- From the constitution center in Philadelphia, here again, George Stephanopoulos.

George Stephanopoulos: (59:51)
And welcome back to our town hall with Former Vice President Joe Biden. Were going to look at the environment right now. Were going to get a question from Michele Ellison and from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, businesswoman, a social worker. Youre a Republican whos voted for Democrats, but youre not sure what youre going to do this time around. Correct?

Michele Ellison: (01:00:06)
Correct. Greetings Former Vice President Biden.

Joe Biden: (01:00:11)
Hello.

Michele Ellison: (01:00:12)
Thank you, Mr. Stephanopoulos. In a 2012 report of the University of Pittsburghs Institute of Politics fracking was discussed and it is possible implications for the waterways from the Commonwealth to the gulf. Fracking has made the population sick and killed wildlife in Southwest Pennsylvania. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and small business development centers have already begun to transition people away from fossil fuels. What industries that are not harmful to human health and the environment are you planning for Southwest Pennsylvania and the nation?

Joe Biden: (01:00:50)
Well, first of all, I make it clear. I do not propose banning fracking. I think you have to make sure that fracking is in fact not emitting methane or polluting the well or dealing with what can be small earthquakes in how theyre drilling. So, it has to be managed very, very well, number one. Number two, what we have to do is the future rests in renewable energy. The single fastest growing energy source in the world right now, because Im going to say something thats going to sound self-serving, but I manage the RecoveryAact and I was able to invest billions of dollars into bringing down the cost per BTU of wind and solar. So now its cheaper than coal, is cheaper than oil right now, and it has great, great promise. And its also the fastest growing employer in the energy industry.

Joe Biden: (01:01:47)
And so there are a number of things that I would do immediately. Number one, there are well over 100,000 wells that are left uncapped in the region. We could hire 128,000 of these people who are working in the industry to cap these wells and get a good salary doing it now, number one. Number two, we should be moving toward finding the new technologies that are going to be able to deal with carbon capture. So, ultimately, its a transition we moved from, to a net zero emission of carbon that were still going to be able to use if we find the right technology, some gases, some gas to be able to, if we can carbon capture.

Joe Biden: (01:02:28)
And I think were going to be able to move in a direction where by the year 2035, well be able to have net zero emissions of carbon from the creation of energy, energy creation so we can move it by dealing with those. And every time we talk about global warming or the environment, the president thinks its a joke and I think as jobs, because what were going to have happened is youll be able to see now, as I started to say before. I as president is going to invest that $600 billion that we spend in government contracts, only on those things that in fact also are not only made in America, but building an infrastructure thats clean and new.

Joe Biden: (01:03:14)
And what we have to do is focus on the transmission of energy across the country from areas relating to solar and wind. The reason is that they have not, that has not been mastered yet. I met a lot of people in Silicon Valley. The battery technology is increasing significantly so youre going to be able to have, for example, solar on your home and a battery the, this by this by this, as Im showing you here in your basement. So when the sun doesnt shine for five days, you still have enough energy. So, were making significant progress.

Joe Biden: (01:03:48)
The other thing were going to do is provide an awful lot of work. Its estimated to put close to a million people to work by weatherizing four million buildings and two million homes, because well save tons and tons of energy or billions of barrels of energy over time. And at the same time provide significant employment and a good union wages, prevailing wages.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:04:11)
Let me stick on fracking for a second day. You said you dont want to ban fracking. As you know, its an important issue here in Pennsylvania. Not everyone buys your denial. A member of the Boilermakers Local 154 Shawn Steffee was quoted in the New York Times today saying You cant have it both ways. It says, You cant meet your goal to end fossil fuels without ending fracking. What do you say to people like Shawn who doubt your denial because they think you want to keep that promise [crosstalk 01:04:34]?

Joe Biden: (01:04:34)
[crosstalk 01:04:34] Boilermakers overwhelming endorsement. Okay? So, the Boilermakers Union has endorsed me because I sat down with them and went in a great detail with leadership exactly what I would do, number one. Number two, what I would do is I would giving tax breaks and subsidizing oil. We dont need to subsidize oil any longer, number one. We should stop that and save billions of dollars over time. What I would also do with regard to theres no, the difference between me and the new green deal, they say automatically by 2030 were going to be carbon free. Not possible.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:05:09)
So, are you for or against it? You say youre not for it, but in your website, it says you call it a crucial framework, the green deal.

Joe Biden: (01:05:16)
My deal is a crucial framework, but not the new green deal. The new green deal calls for elimination of all non renewable energy by 2030. You cant get there. Youre going to need to be able to transition, George, to be able to transition to get to the place where we invest in new technologies that allow us to do things that get us to a place where we get to net zero emission, including in agriculture. Ive laid out a detailed plan. We should be taking the plan where we allow significant more land to be put in conservation, plant deep rooted plants which absorb carbon from the air and in fact, pay farmers to do it. We can do things like pelletize all the chicken manure and all the horse manure and cow manure, and take out the methane and use it as fertilizer and make a lot of money doing it.

Joe Biden: (01:06:06)
For example, right now, down in  And people when I say that, they wonder what Im talking about. The biggest carbon sink in the world is the Amazon. More carbon absorbed from the air diminishing global warming in the Amazon than all the carbon emitted on a yearly basis from the United States of America from all vehicles on all means. So we have to use our imaginations. We have to move in the direction as well providing for electric vehicles. Electric vehicles will save billions of gallons of oil, [inaudible 01:06:38] estimated, not me, Wall street, one million automobile jobs, but were lagging me. I mean, were not investing. Were not doing any of the research.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:06:48)
Got to take another quick break. Well be right back. Welcome back to our town hall with Former Vice President Joe Biden. The next question comes from Mark Hoffman, Center Valley, Pennsylvania, conservative, who voted for Trump in 2016.

Mark Hoffman: (01:11:30)
Welcome to Pennsylvania, Mr. Vice President.

Joe Biden: (01:11:33)
Good to be back home. Im from Pennsylvania.

Mark Hoffman: (01:11:34)
Yes, I know. Scranton, right?

Joe Biden: (01:11:36)
Yep.

Mark Hoffman: (01:11:37)
So, pieces breaking out all over the world. Our troops are coming home. Serbia is talking to Kosovo and the Arabs and Israelis are talking peace which I believe is a modern day miracle whats going on. Does President Trumps foreign policy deserves some credit?

Joe Biden: (01:11:57)
A little more, but not a whole lot. We find ourselves in a position where were more isolated in the world than weve ever been. Our allies-

Joe Biden: (01:12:03)
Were more isolated in the world than we ever have been. Our allies Our go it alone, our America first has made America alone. You have Iran closer to having enough nuclear material to build a bomb. North Korea has more bombs and missiles available to it. We find ourselves where our NATO allies are publicly saying they cant count on us. Were in a situation as well, where in the far East, we find ourselves, in the Western Pacific, where were isolated as well. You have Japan and South Korea at odds with one another. China is making moves. So I would say, were find ourselves less secure than weve been. I do compliment the president on the deal with Israel recently. But if you take a look, were not very well trusted around the world. When 17 major nations in the world were asked who they trust more, whos a better leader, and the president came in behind both, the international survey, both behind Putin, as well as Xi. And look what Putin is doing. You have bounties on American militaries heads in Afghanistan. They have more people there now, by the way, than when we left in Afghanistan. And we find ourselves in a situation where hes talked to Putin six times, hadnt said a word to him. And NATO is on the risk of beginning crack because they doubt whether were there. You see whats happened in everything from Belarus to Poland, to Hungary, and the rise of totalitarian regimes in the world. And as well as, this president embraces all the thugs in the world. Hes best friends with the leader of North Korea, sending love letters.

Joe Biden: (01:13:57)
He doesnt take on Putin in any way. Hes learned the art of the steal from the art of the deal by Xi and China. So I would respectfully suggest, no, there is no plan, no coherent plan for foreign policy. Weve been most effective as a world leader, in my humble opinion, not just by the exercise of our power. Were the most powerful nation in the world, but the power of our example. Thats whats led the rest of the world to follow us on almost everything. Hes pulled out of almost every international organization. He gets laughed at, literally, not figuratively, when he goes to the United Nations. Its not about the president, per se. Its about the nation and the lack of respect thats shown to us.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:14:55)
Want to get one more question in this segment, and it comes from Mieke Haeck. Shes from State College, Pennsylvania. This is your first presidential election that youre vote in.

Mieke Haeck: (01:15:03)
It is.

Joe Biden: (01:15:04)
Hi, Mieke. How are you?

Mieke Haeck: (01:15:06)
Im good. Thank you. Im the proud mom of two girls, 8 and 10. My youngest daughter is transgender. The Trump administration has attacked the rights of transgender people, banning them from military service, weakening non-discrimination protections, and even removing the word transgender from some government websites. How will you, as president, reverse this dangerous and discriminatory agenda and ensure that the lives and rights of LGBTQ people are protected under US law?

Joe Biden: (01:15:51)
I will flat out just change the law. Eliminate those executive orders, number one. You may recall, Im the guy who said I was raised by a man who, I remember, I was being dropped off. My dad was a high school educated, well-read man who was a really decent guy. And I was being dropped off to get an application in the center of our city, Wilmington, Delaware, the corporate capital of the world at the time. Im getting out to get an application to be a lifeguard in the African-American community, because there was a big swimming pool complex.

Joe Biden: (01:16:26)
And these two men, well-dressed, leaned up and hugged one another and kissed one another. Im getting out of the car at the light, and I turned to my dad. My dad looked me. He said, Joey, its simple. They love each other. The idea that an 8 year old child or a 10 year old child decides, I decided I want to be transgender. Thats what I think Id like to be. Itd make my life a lot easier. There should be zero discrimination. And whats happening is too many transgender women of color are being murdered. Theyre being murdered. I think its up to, now, 17. Dont hold me to that number, but its Its higher now?

Mieke Haeck: (01:17:04)
Yeah.

Joe Biden: (01:17:04)
And thats just this year. And so I promise you, there is no reason to suggest that there should be any right denied your daughter, or daughters, whichever, one or two.

Mieke Haeck: (01:17:17)
One.

Joe Biden: (01:17:18)
One. Your daughter, that your other daughter has a right to be and do. None. Zero. And by the way, my son Beau, who passed away, was the attorney general of the state of Delaware. He was the guy who got the first transgender law passed in the state of Delaware. And because of a young man who became a woman, who worked for him in the attorney generals office.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:17:40)
Weve got one more segment coming up. Thank you.

Joe Biden: (01:17:43)
And Im proud of her.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:17:44)
Well be right back.

Speaker 3: (01:21:58)
The vice president and the people, a special edition of 2020. Here again, George Stephanopoulos.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:22:07)
And welcome back to our town hall with former Vice President Joe Biden. The next question comes from Keenan Wilson, Narberth, Pennsylvania, Democrat.

Keenan Wilson: (01:22:15)
Good evening. You say that you committed to entering this race after the events of Charlottesville in 2017. I assume that that feeling that prompted you to run will not go away once the results are determined. So hypothetically, if you lose, how will you use your platform to urge President Donald Trump, and those rallying behind him, towards the ideals of a more perfect union?

Joe Biden: (01:22:44)
Well, to be very honest with you, I think thats very hard. Things have not let themselves to him learning from whats happened, whats gone before. Instead of being chastened by being one of the few presidents, the only president to be impeached and then have a member of his own party vote to expel him, it emboldened him. But what I will do Hopefully, Ill go back to being a professor at the University of Pennsylvania. And making the case that Ive been made, and at the Biden Institute at the University of Delaware, focusing on these same issues, relating to what constitutes decency and honor in this country. Its the thing that got me involved in public life to begin with. As a kid, Id moved from Scranton, where there were no African-Americans and moved down to Claymont, Delaware.

Joe Biden: (01:23:44)
And in Delaware we have the eight largest Black population, as a percent of population. It was an epiphany for me seeing what was going on, and I got deeply involved. Im no great shakes. I wasnt John Lewis. I dont mean to imply that. But its the thing thats motivated My dad used to have an expression for real. He said, Everyones entitled to be treated with dignity. Everybody. And it was real. Everybody is. And so whether Im a defeated candidate for president back teaching or Im elected president, it is a major element of everything that Im about, because it reflects who we are as a nation.

Joe Biden: (01:24:26)
Every single solitary generation, the dial has moved closer and closer and more and more to inclusion. And we are a country that is a country of slaves who came here 400 years ago, Indigenous people, and everyone else is an immigrant. And were a diverse country. And unless we are able to treat people equally, were just never going to meet our potential. But I think the American people want to see that happen. I think theyre ready to see it happen. And Id tell you one thing, if Im elected president, you will not hear me race baiting. Youll not hear me dividing. Youll hear me trying to unify, and bring people together. When I said I was running because I wanted to unify the country, people said, Well, there are the old days. We better be able to do it again.

Keenan Wilson: (01:25:10)
Agreed.

Joe Biden: (01:25:10)
Wed better be able to do it again.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:25:11)
Mr. Vice President, if you lose, what will that say to you about where America is today?

Joe Biden: (01:25:16)
Well, it could say Im a lousy candidate, and I didnt do a good job. But I hope that it doesnt say that we are as racially, ethnically, and religiously at odds with one another as it appears the president wants us to be. Usually, the presidents in my view, with all due respect, has been divide and conquer. The way he does better if he splits us. Theres division. And I think people need hope. Look, George, Ive never been more optimistic about the prospect for this country than I am today. And I really mean that. I think the people are ready. They understand whats at stake, and its not about Democrat or Republican. If I get elected, Im running as a proud Democrat, but Im going to be an American president. Im going to take care of those who voted against me, as well as those who voted for me, for real. Thats a presence too. We got to heal this nation, because we have the greatest opportunity to any country in the world to own the 21st century. And we cant do it divided.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:26:28)
One more break. Well be right back. And we are wrapping up our town hall with former Vice President Joe Biden. Mr. Vice President, as you know, President Trump had a town hall meeting tonight, as well. During that town hall meeting, he was asked several times whether he took a COVID test the day of your last debate. Youre supposed to have another debate a week from tonight. Just two quick questions. Do you expect that debate to happen? Will you demand that President Trump take a test that day and that it be negative before you debate?

Joe Biden: (01:30:49)
Yeah. And by the way, before I came up here, I took another test. Ive been taking them every day, the deep test, the ones that go in most. Because if I had not passed that test, I didnt want to come here and expose anybody. And I just think its just decency, to be able to determine whether or not youre clear. Im less concerned about me, but then the guys with the cameras, the people working in the Secret Service guys you drive up with, all those people. And so, yes, I believe he will do that. Look, Im going to abide by what the commission rules call for. I was prepared to debate him remotely, which was supposed to happen. And he said he wouldnt do that, a virtual debate, or a town hall. He didnt want to do that. I didnt set those rules. The commission set the rules. So whatever rules they set, Im confident that the Cleveland Clinic is the one overseeing it. I think theyre going to not let happen what happened last time. Theyre going to demand that its safe.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:32:00)
But you expect to be there?

Joe Biden: (01:32:01)
I expect to be there.

George Stephanopoulos: (01:32:02)
